Fodor on Concepts: How to be a non-Atomist without being a Holist

        By a “concept”, I mean one’s ability to think about a thing. I am able to have thoughts about Socrates; therefore I have a concept of the man. I am able to have thoughts about the number four; therefore I have a concept of that entity. 
       Jerry Fodor argues that, with a few trivial exceptions, our concepts are “atoms”. A grasp of any one thing presupposes a grasp of nothing else. I can have a concept of knowledge without having a concept of truth or belief or justification. I can have a concept of causality without have a concept  of space or time or persistence. I can have a concept of Socrates without having a concept of  corporeality, location in space or time, movement in space, or causality, personal identity, or sentience. 
    To sum up: For Fodor, one can have a concept of (practically) any one thing without having a concept of anything else. A grasp of (practically) anything presupposes a grasp of nothing. Our concepts are “atoms”; they are indivisible and ultimate; they cannot (typically) be broken down into other concepts.
      Fodor provides three ingenious arguments for this astonishing position. The purpose of this paper is examine those arguments. I believe that all three arguments involve non-sequiturs. Where the first two are concerned, the non-sequiturs are, I believe, fairly obvious. But the non-sequitur involved in the third is by no means obvious; and to expose it, we will have to put forth some substantive positive theses about the nature of concepts.   

§    Let us start with a terminological point. The term “concept” is ambiguous. The word “concept” can refer to some platonic, non-mental entity, as in: “anything falling under the concept square also falls under the concept closed figure.” But the word “concept” also has a psychological sense; it can refer to one’s grasp of something, as in: “Locke identified concepts with mental images” or “before 1930, nobody had a concept of a quark”.    
     We need two different words here, if we are to avoid intolerable confusion.1 To denote concepts in the non-mental sense, let us use the word “concepto” (plural: “conceptso”).  To denote concepts in the psychological sense, let us simply use the word “concept” (no subscript).2
    I will talk about “having” concepts and “grasping” conceptso. I have a concept (no subscript) of the number two. And I grasp the corresponding concepto. 

§     Here is a view about concepts that certainly has at least some initial plausibility. It is the view that I hold and that Fodor rejects.
    Possession of any one concept presupposes possession of others. To grasp any one thing, one must be able to grasp others. One cannot think about, or mentally represent, a given thing unless one think about others. Consider the concepto of a square. Suppose some creature had no idea what it was for a figure to have four sides, or what it was for an edge to be straight. Would that thing have any idea what it was for something to be a square? Intuitively, the answer seems to be “no”. So to grasp the concepto square, one must grasp the conceptso of the number four, of straightness, of flatness, and so on. 
      Of course, what we just said about the concepto square applies to a grasp any one of these concepts. Consider the concepto of the number four. To have a concept of that thing, one presumably has to have a concept of the numbers three, two and so on. To have concepts of those things, one must presumably have concepts of magnitude, order, and who knows what else. 
     The concepto of a square might seem like a tendentious one. A square is a structure; to be a square just is to have certain structural or ordinal features. So given only that a grasp of that concepto presupposes a grasp of others, perhaps no general truths follow regarding the nature of conception.  
      But what is obviously true of the concepto square is, at least arguably, true of all other conceptso – even those that seem that most devoid of structure. Consider the concepto of redness. One might naively think that an otherwise conceptless creature could grasp this concepto. All the creature needs is the ability to have a certain kind of phenomenal content – it doesn’t need an articulated network of background concepts. 
      But such a view is dubious. An object that really is red -- i.e. that has the microphysical properties common to stop-signs, apples, and the like – can be given to a person of good eyesight through very different sorts of phenomenal contents. You have 20/20 vision. You look at the apple from place p1. The phenomenology of your perception of its color is one way. You look at the apple from place p2. Now the phenomenology of your perception of its color is different. This is the case even if you are looking at the apple under optimal conditions – you’re in a brightly lit room, your eyes in perfect working order, and so on. No matter how “optimal” or “standard” the conditions of perception are, there will never be a one-one correspondence between things’ actual colors and your phenomenology. A given shade of red will given to you through different phenomenal contents. 
    Any artist knows this. If you want to depict its color as it appears to you from p1, you use one mix of paint. If you want to depict its color as it appears to you from p2, you use a different mix of paint. This is the case, as any artist knows, not just if you are in a room with bad or uneven lighting: it holds even in circumstances where the lighting conditions are optimal – where they are unnaturally good. 
    To see something as having a certain color isn’t just to have an experience with a certain phenomenology. When you just see, so to speak, that something is red, a wealth of background information is operative. Phenomenology is certainly part of the story, but not all of it. The phenomenology has to be appropriately contextualized. And this contextualization seems to presuppose some understanding of the conditions of perception; it thus presupposes an articulated picture of the world. So even a concept of redness – surely our best candidate for a “simple” concept, a concept that doesn’t presuppose a wealth of other concepts  – is available to only to a creature with a formidable representational endowment. 
    What about purely phenomenal concepts? Consider the experience of tasting honey. Consider what it is like to have that kind of experience. Perhaps an otherwise conceptless creature could have a concept of what it is like to have that kind of experience. So here, it will be thought, we have found a genuinely simple and foundational concept. 
    But even here there is room for doubt. First of all, there is a difference between, on the one hand, being able to have an experience with that sort of phenomenology, and on the other hand, having a concept of that sort of experience. Perhaps the ability to have that kind of phenomenal content doesn’t require any sort of conceptual background. But that doesn’t mean that the same is true of the ability to have a concept of that kind of experience. Having a concept of that kind of experience would seem to involve being able to recognize that occurrence of states with that sort of phenomenology and also have thoughts about such states. Even though (perhaps3) little or no cognitive wherewithal is needed to have the phenomenology, it is hard to believe that the same is true of the ability to recognize the phenomenology for what it is. To recognize is to single out. Singling a thing out seems to involve knowing how that thing is different from other things. So, at least on the face of it, recognizing a thing involves having a concept of how thing differs from other things. So having a concept of a certain kind of phenomenology would seem to involve being able to compare it with other things, and thus to presuppose that one has concepts of those other things. So while the ability to experience a certain kind of phenomenal content may be conceptually innocent, the same appears not to be true of the ability to have concept of that sort of experience. 
       Let us state what this extremely brief survey has told us. There does not appear to be any concept  that we can have without having others. There does not appear to be any concepto that one can grasp without grasping many others. 
     But there is more to say. Obviously we don’t just grasp conceptso; we also grasp spatiotemporal objects – rocks, trees, and the like. Let us briefly talk about our concepts of these things. 
   We know about external objects entirely through sense-perception. A sense-perception necessarily presents things as having various properties – as having a certain color, shape, location, state of motion. Strictly speaking, what is given to one in sense-perception is never (just) a thing: it is a state of affairs. You don’t just see the rock. You see a state of affairs involving the rock: you see an object of a certain shape, color, relative location, and so on. If a thing is to be represented to you as having a certain color, location, state of motion, and so on, it seems to follow that – at some level, in some way – you have cognitive access to these properties: concepts of these properties constitute your representational palette. 
    So any sense-perception has a great deal of “descriptive structure”, and also presupposes some kind of cognitive access to a wealth of properties. Since sense-perception is essentially involved in our being able to think about external objects, it would seem to follow that our concepts of such objects are replete with conceptual structure. 
     To sum up, there is at least something to be said for the following view. A concept of a conceptso always seems to presuppose networks of background concepts. The same is true of our concepts of external objects. Attempts to find genuinely foundational concepts – concepts an otherwise conceptless creature can have – seem to bear no fruit. Our best candidates for that honor (e.g. the concepto of what it is for something to be red, the concepto of what it is to have an experience with such and such phenomenology) turn out to bristle with exactly the sort of structure we were hoping they wouldn’t have. 
     So, on the face of it, there seem to be no atomic concepts – no concepts that are not to some degree constituted by other concepts. There seems to be no concept C such that a creature could have C without also having various other concepts. There are no foundational concepts. After all, a foundational concept is one such that possession of it doesn’t presuppose possession of others. 

§      In Concepts, Jerry Fodor argues for the exact opposite of this view. He argues that, with some trivial exceptions, all concepts are atoms. For any concept C, possession of C does not presuppose possession of other concepts. In principle, one could have a concept of knowledge without a concept of belief or truth (this is one of Fodor’s own examples); of justice without having a concept of sentience; of existence in the external world without having a concept of persistence in space and time or of causality; of Tuesday without having a concept of Monday (again, one of Fodor’s own examples). 
     Fodor’s overall view is generally rejected. Most hold that atomism is false. But it has not yet been said, to my satisfaction, just where his arguments for that view go wrong. In this respect, Fodor is a latter day Berkeley. Everybody thinks that Berkeley is wrong: of course there are mind-independent objects. But it is not often that one hears it clearly stated just where Berkeley’s reasoning goes astray. Similarly, no one has, in my view, pinpointed the non-sequiturs in Fodor’s arguments, though many take it for granted that his conclusion is false. 
     In this paper, I will present Fodor’s three arguments, and I will try to show where  they go astray. One those arguments involves a fairly blatant non-sequitur. But the other two are quite sturdy. Identifying the fallacies in them involves producing some positive alternative theories about the nature of conception, and  is therefore not a zero-sum affair. 
      
§  First of all, Fodor actually uses the term “conceptual atomism” to refer to two distinct (though related) doctrines. 


 (i) One’s grasp of a given thing does not typically presuppose a grasp of other things.  No concept presupposes possession of any other concept. 


(ii) Conceptso (note the subscript) are atoms. They cannot be broken down into other conceptso. Consequently, there are (with some trivial exceptions) no analytic truths.4 


    As we discussed, it certainly seems that, if one grasps the concepto knowledge, one also grasps the concepto true belief. This is exactly what Fodor denies. In his view, one could grasp the concepto knowledge without grasping any other conceptso.      
    Fodor admits that there are some exceptions to this. A grasp of the concepto red cow is not an atom, as it plainly consists of a grasp of the concepto red and also the concepto cow. The same is true of the concepto prime number. If the concepto one is grasping is patently synthesized out of other conceptso, then a grasp of it is not an atom.5 But with these exceptions, one’s grasp of a concepto is always an atom. 
      Fodor’s denial of (i) is connected with his denial of (ii). Fodor thinks that conceptso (with the trivial exceptions just given) have no internal structure. The concepto knowledge has no constitutive connections to the conceptso belief or truth or justification. Of course, if Fodor is right about that, then we can see why a grasp of knowledge wouldn’t presuppose a grasp of these other conceptso. 
     Fodor obviously admits that conceptso typically appear to have a great deal of analytic structure. Obviously knowledge is always true appears to be analytic; and so do 2 comes before 3 and causes precede their effects. He goes to great and ingenious lengths to explain away this appearance of analyticity.6 We will consider these efforts soon enough. 
     Fodor grants that there are some analytic truths. The concepto red cow is “patently phrasal”, as Fodor puts it. It is obviously built out of other conceptso (red and cow). Any such concepto will clearly be associated with various analytic truths. (x is a red cow implies, and is implied by, the conjunction x is red and  x is a cow.) Fodor grants the existence of analyticities of that kind.  And Fodor grants that x is a cow entails x is a cow.  Notice that those analyticities are trivial. They don’t expose any hidden depths on the part of the relevant conceptso. In Fodor’s view, all analytic truths are in the same category as:

(*)  if x is a red cow, then x is a cow. 
  
    We can be a little more precise about this. (Here we are going beyond what Fodor himself says.) In (*), the non-logical terms occur inessentially. Suppose you replace “cow” with “horse”. The result will be a truth. Suppose you replace “red” with “green” or “square”: what results will be a truth. The truth of (*) doesn’t turn on anything peculiar to the conceptso red and cow. Any other concepts could take their place. Since (*) doesn’t turn anything peculiar to those conceptso, it doesn’t really tell you anything about them. It doesn’t tell you how those conceptso are different from the conceptso horse and green. 
     Now consider the proposition: 

(**) Any case of knowledge is a case of true-belief (but not vice versa). 

If you replace “knowledge” with “justice”, or if you replace “true” with “green”,  what results is a falsehood (or possibly nonsense). So in (*),  “knowledge” occurs essentially. The truth of (**) turns on something peculiar to the conceptso knowledge and belief and so forth.  
        Fodor grants analytic status to propositions like (*) – propositions whose truth doesn’t turn anything peculiar to the conceptso occurring therein. Fodor denies analytic status to propositions like (**) – propositions whose truth does turn on the peculiarities of the conceptso involved. He appears to grant analytic status to propositions that are formally true. But apart from that, he seems to think that there are no, or very few, analytic truths. (Fodor seems to think that bachelors are unmarried males is analytically true. But even here he has reservations.) 

§ Fodor provides three arguments for atomism. Let us turn to Fodor’s first of these. Two thousand years of work have yielded no unexceptionable definitions of ‘knowledge’, ‘justice’, or ‘number’. In fact, even the most pedestrian conceptso are indefinable. Consider the concepto associated with the verb ‘to paint.’7 Fodor goes through a number of reasonable-seeming definitions of this concepto, and shows that they all fail. For example, it might seem that ‘to paint’ something is just to cover it with paint. But this is not so. If you dip your paint-brush in a paint-bucket, you are not painting your brush, even though you are covering it with paint. 
      Analogous remarks apply to attempted definitions of practically any concepto. Try giving a definition of ‘knowledge’ or ‘justice’. You’ll probably find that there is a counter-example to it. 
      Given the apparent indefinability of most conceptso, Fodor infers that they have no structure: they are simples. The idea is that, if a concepto is not simple, then it is built out of other things, presumably other conceptso. If it is built out of other things, then there is obviously some true proposition saying how it is built out of those other things: there is a definition or analysis of that concepto. Since there are no adequate analyses of conceptso, it follows that they are not built out of other conceptso. 
      On the face of it, this argument concerns conceptso, not concepts. It shows that conceptso – not conceptso – are atoms. But it indirectly supports the idea that conceptso are atoms. If two conceptso are not analytically related, then it is hard to see why a grasp of the one would involve a grasp of the other. So if no two conceptso are thus related, then it is hard to see why a grasp of any one concepto would presuppose a grasp of others.  The other side of the coin is that if any concepto is individuated by its analytic relations to various other conceptso, then presumably one must have some grasp of these analytic relations to grasp any given concepto: so one would have to grasp a multiplicity of conceptso to grasp a single one of them. So given that Fodor wants to defend the view that concepts (no subscript) are atoms, he is probably right to attack the view that conceptso (note the subscript) are atoms.

Evaluating Fodor’s 1st Argument 


   This argument involves a non-sequitur. Given his premises, what Fodor should have concluded  is that conceptso have an infinite amount of internal structure. Fodor has made a case that it is hard to give conceptuallyo necessary and sufficient conditions for a thing’s falling under a concepto.8 But for practically any concepto, it is extremely easy to give conceptuallyo necessary conditions. (In effect, Fodor himself shows this.) Conceptuallyo necessary  conditions obviously correspond to analyticities. For x to be an act of painting, it is conceptuallyo necessary that x be an act of putting paint on something. This by itself shows that there is an internal or constitutive relation between ‘Bob painted y’ and ‘Bob put paint on y’ and, therefore, that the concepto ‘to paint’ has conceptual structure – is not an atom.9 
     Fodor goes through several attempted definitions of the concepto paint (the concepto corresponding to the verb, not the noun, ‘paint’). He points out that, for each one of them, there is something that is not an act of painting that falls under that definition. What Fodor does not say is that each of these attempted definitions gives a necessary condition for x’s being an act of painting. So the evidence suggests that it is hard to give conceptuallyo necessary and sufficient conditions for x’s falling under the concepto paint. But the evidence also suggests that we can generate ad infinitum conceptuallyo necessary conditions for something’s being an act of painting. So given that necessary conditions indicate conceptual structure, it follows that paint has an infinite amount of conceptualo structure. 
      This point applies mutatis mutandis to practically any other concepto one cites. Consider the concepto knowledge. It is easy to generate conceptually necessary conditions for x’s falling under that concepto. Gettierologists have generated countless such conditions. This is not to mention the ones that have always been known: x must be true and justified and a belief. So it seems possible to generate conceptuallyo necessary conditions ad infinitum for x’s being a case of knowledge. If that is right, then the concepto knowledge has an infinite amount of analytic structure, contrary to what Fodor says. If that is wrong, then Fodor is again wrong. Suppose that, after adding some more epicycles, Gettierologists produce a correct analysis of knowledge (x is knowledge iff x is reliably caused, justified, true, well-entrenched….belief). In that case, once again, Fodor is wrong to say that the concepto knowledge  has no analytic structure.  
    
§  Let us now turn to Fodor’s second argument. Right now, let us focus on one’s grasp of the concepto knowledge. Let us focus one’s concept (no subscript) of that concepto.   
     Suppose that one’s concept of knowledge really did implicate concepts of truth, justification, and belief – along with whatever concepts are presupposed by these concepts. In that case, we would expect cognitive operations concerning knowledge to be slower, requiring of more acumen, and generally more unwieldy than cognitive operations concerning justification or truth. But we find no such thing. Thought processes involving one’s concept of knowledge are at least  as speedy and energy-efficient as thought processes involving the concepts that – if the non-atomist view is correct – are constitutive of one’s knowledge-concept. Thoughts about knowledge are at least as speedy and efficient as thoughts about truth, justification, belief, sentience, and so on.10
    Of course, we must ask: why must it be the case that, if a grasp of knowledge implicates a grasp of truth, reliability, belief, and so on, then cognitive operations with knowledge would be slower than those with (say) truth? Here is Fodor’s answer. First of all, when it is said that one’s ability to think about knowledge ‘implicates’ or ‘presupposes’ an ability to think about (e.g.) truth, what is meant is not that there is some merely causal connection between the two abilities, but that there is some kind of metaphysical relation: what it is to be able to think about x as being a case of knowledge is (inter alia) to see that x has the properties of being a  belief that is non-accidentally true and reliably caused …So for there to be some kind of constitutive relation between one’s ability to think about knowledge and one’s ability to think about  justification or truth is for there to be some metaphysically necessary relation between these two capacities. 
    Given what Hume said, it seems that there can be no metaphysically necessary relation between x and y unless x makes up y or vice versa. (Identity can be seen as a limiting case of this relation.) If x and y are spatio-temporal entities – and surely concepts  are such things, for they are realized by configurations of neural matter – then no necessary relation can hold between them unless one of them literally makes up the other, unless, in effect, one of them is a part of the other. But if one’s 998-concept, and one’s 997-concept… make up one’s 999-concept, then presumably in exercising the latter, one is exercising the former. Of course, to ‘exercise’ one’s 999-concept just is to think about 999. So it seems to follow that, if there are constitutive relations among one’s concepts of 999, 998, 997…then in thinking about 999, one is ipso facto thinking about 998, 997, 996…2 and 1. But, as Fodor says,  it seems unlikely that I must simultaneously think about 1000 numbers to think about 999. Therefore, my 999-concept is not constitutively related to my 998-concept , my 997-concept …or to any other concepto of mine to which it might initially appear to be constitutively related. 

Evaluating Fodor’s 2nd Argument 

     This is a very clever argument. But it covertly assumes the very atomism that it is meant to establish.11 What the non-atomist maintains is specifically that there are no atomic concepts: there are no concepts that are not constituted by other concepts. So there are no concepts “at the bottom” (for there is no bottom). What the non-atomist maintains is specifically that we mustn’t think of the body of our concepts as having a structure like that of a building – where there is a ground floor, a second floor resting on the ground floor, a third floor resting on the first two, and so on. What he maintains is specifically that our concepts support one another. The right metaphor is a web or arc, not a skyscraper. 
     Fodor’s argument presupposes that, if non-atomism is right, the relation between one’s grasp of the concepto knowledge and one’s grasp of (say) the conceptso truth or justification is like the relation of the third story of a building to the second story: the one supports the other but not vice versa. Fodor seems to think that, if non-atomism is correct, then the relation between one’s grasp of the concepto and one’s grasp of the other is thus asymmetrical. But this is exactly what the non-atomist denies. The non-atomist maintains specifically that there are no concepts at the bottom supporting everything else and that everything supports everything. He maintains that, while one’s grasp of the concepto knowledge is constituted (in part) by a grasp of the concepto justification, the constitution relation goes in the other direction as well. One’s grasp of the one concepto supports one’s grasp of the other – as different parts of a web support one another. There is nothing at the bottom that supports a grasp of everything else. So, if the non-atomist is right, there is no expectation that operations with the one concepto should be more unwieldy than operations with the other. Since one’s various concepts (no subscript) hold one another in place, there is a certain equality among them. None of them is heavier (so to speak) than the other. 
    Fodor’s idea is that, if non-atomism were right, then certain concepts would be feather-light, while others   would be heavy. There would be those concepts that are fundamental, and thus don’t presuppose a baggage of various other concepts: these are the light ones. And there would be those that do presuppose this sort of baggage: these are the heavy ones.
    But it is just this sort of picture that the non-atomist rejects. What the non-atomist rejects is precisely the idea that there are foundational concepts, and then a second  set of  concepts built on those, and a third set built on the second set, and so on. So what the non-atomist rejects is precisely the view that this kind of asymmetry prevails. For the non-atomist, constitution is typically a mutual relation. Given this, Fodor’s argument collapses. One’s concept of knowledge is constitutively related to one’s concept of justification. But this doesn’t mean that one of those concepts must be more basic than the other or, therefore, that use of the one demands more sophistication or energy than the other. Those concepts hold each other in place; neither is sitting on top of the other; neither is, in any absolute sense, simpler or more fundamental than the other. So neither is more wieldy or unwieldy than the other. On the non-atomist picture, constitution is (or can be) a mutual relation. Given only that the one concept is constitutively related to the other, no inferences can be made as to whether operations with the one concept are in any sense more demanding than operations with the other. 
    Of course, when we are talking about physical objects, like statues, the constitution relation is asymmetrical. If the x constitutes y, then y doesn’t (typically) constitute x. (In the degenerate case where x and y are identical, then perhaps the constitution relation can be thought to go in both directions – but only because, in that case, it doesn’t really go in any direction.) So if the sense in which one’s concept of truth were constitutive of one’s concept of knowledge were identical with the sense in which the clay is constitutive of the statue, then the constitution relation in the first case would probably be asymmetrical. But when we say that certain concepts are “constitutive” of others, we are probably not talking about the kind of constitutive relation that holds between the clay and the statue. The latter is, at most, a metaphor for the former – and it is (I think we are already seeing) a very misleading metaphor.


§  Fodor’s 3rd argument is the most compelling. 
   
     For the sake of argument, suppose that some kind non-atomism is the case. In that case, a grasp of the concepto square presupposes a grasp of various other conceptso – four, straight, planar, and so on. The idea is that to think of something as a square, you must think of it also as flat, four-sided, and so on. So, for the non-atomist, to think of x as a square just is for you to accept various other things about x. Put another way, you believe that x is a square exactly if you accept that x is flat, four-sided, and so on. The content of a belief supervenes entirely on what you accept in virtue of having that belief – on what you are prepared to infer. Thus, for the non-atomist, beliefs are individuated by their “inferential roles”. Let C be some brain-state of  yours. For the non-atomist, C qualifies as a belief that x is a square exactly if, in virtue of having C, you are prepared to hold that x has four-sides, that x is not a hexagon, that x is planar, and so forth. So C’s content supervenes entirely on C’s inferential role. Thus non-atomism presupposes what might be called “inferential role semantics” (IRS). 
    (For reasons I will give, I myself do not think that non-atomism requires that some kind of inferential role semantics be correct. Right now I am presenting Fodor’s argument.) 
    Fodor says that IRS unacceptable for a couple of related reasons. Let b1 be my belief that x is a square and let b2 be Gauss’s belief that x is a square. Gauss knew a lot things about squares that I do not. So what he was prepared to accept from the proposition x is a square is very different from what I would be prepared to accept from that proposition. So b1 has a very different inferential role from b2. For IRS, this means that, contrary to our hypothesis, b1 and b2 don’t have quite the same content – at most, they have similar content. But obviously they do have the same content: they are both beliefs to the effect that x is a square.
   Let us generalize this point. For an advocate of IRS, differences in inferential role mean differences in content: unless there is identity of inferential role, there is not identity of content. Given this, let B and B* be any two beliefs.  Unless B and B* have precisely the same inferential role, they do not have the same content. The trouble is that practically no two beliefs have precisely the same inferential role. Let Smith and Brown be two mathematicians who are in exact agreement as to the mathematically significant properties of the number two. Given n=2, Smith will, whereas Brown will not, accept the proposition n=the age of my son when he learned how to read; and Brown, whereas Smith will not, accept the proposition n=the number of pages of my most impressive proof. So, for IRS, the two beliefs in question don’t have the same content. But obviously this is false – obviously they have precisely the same content: they are both beliefs to the effect that n=2. For IRS, those two beliefs have, at most, similar contents. 
   In general, for IRS, unless there is identity of inferential role there is, at best, similarity of content. But no two cognitive states have identical inferential roles. So there can be no two cognitive states that have the same content: there can, at most, be similarity of content. So two people never grasp the very same proposition: thus there is nothing that two people agree or disagree about, for there is no commonly grasped content. But this is surely false. Surely many different people can grasp the same concepto and the same proposition. 
    In connection with this, IRS seems to be committed to an untenable form of holism. Let b1 be an arbitrary belief had by Smith, let p1 be the proposition which is believed.; Let b2 be an arbitrary belief had by Jones; and let p2 be the proposition thereby believed.  Any two differences in what Smith and Jones believe will be reflected in a difference in the inferential roles had by b1 and b2. There are two reasons for this. Suppose Smith believes I am in Paris right now whereas Jones does not. In that case, Smith will be prepared to infer the conjunction I am in Paris right now and P whereas Jones will not be prepared to make that inference. So any difference in what is believed can readily be reflected in a difference in inferential role. So if IRS is right , any difference in what two people believe (or in what a given person believes at two different times) amounts to a total difference in what is believed and, more generally, what is grasped. So unless two people are in total agreement about everything, then there will be nothing that they grasp in common. So IRS makes it totally impossible for two people even to grasp the same proposition: there can be no agreement or disagreement about anything.  
    But this is absurd, as previously noted.
    There is another related problem with IRS – sometimes it is known as the “error-objection” to IRS. If the inferential role of a concept determines its content, then inferences involving that concept cannot be wrong: since they define the concept, and give it its content, they cannot be wrong relative to the content of that concept. Imagine the following. There is some function F such that you have the following beliefs about it. F(4)=6, F(8)=10, and so on: for each x less than a thousand, you believe that F(x)=x+2. But you also believe that F(1000)=1004, and that F(1006)=1010, and so on. If IRS is right, then the fact that you take F(1000) to equal 1004  means that the function you were grasping all along was something other than F(x)=x+2. You were grasping some other function – perhaps for all x less than a thousand, F(x)=x+2, but for all x greater than a 1000, F(x)=x+4. The point is: if IRS is right, you cannot wrongly apply a function that you grasp; for the beliefs you have determine which function you are grasping. So IRS makes it impossible for to wrongly apply a concept: wrong applications of a given concept ends up being a correct application of some other concept. If you decide that F(1000)=1004, you are not wrongly apply F(x)=x+2: you are rightly apply some “bent” cousin of that function. If IRS is right, then given any concepto C, an exactly similar argument shows that wrong applications of C collapse into correct applications of some other concepto C*. (If, with Frege, we think of concepts as being identical with functions – functions from individuals to truth-values – then it is very clear how generalize the argument just made.)  
    But plainly there is such a thing as wrongly applying a function. There is such a thing as wrongly adding two numbers: it is not as though would-be wrong applications of the addition-function collapse into correct applications of the addition* function, where addition* is some bent version of addition. So IRS is wrong.

Evaluating Fodor’s 3rd Argument 

       I think that Fodor’s 3rd argument collapses when we apply an analogue of Kripke’s distinction between reference-fixing and meaning-giving. 
       Let us start with the basics. When we say that somebody has a “concept” of some thing x, what we do we mean? We mean, I think, that that person can think about x – that he can entertain thoughts (of some kind or other) about that thing. To have a concept of Socrates is to be able to have thoughts about Socrates – thoughts like Socrates was bald.  If we say that Sam has a concept of the number two, we are saying, nearly enough, that Sam can think true or false things about that number. It seems self-contradictory to say: “Sam has a concept of the number two. But he just can’t grasp truths of falsehoods concerning that number.” 
      Being able to think about a thing seems to involve being able to single it out. To be able to think about the number two, you need to be able to cognitively lock onto it, to the exclusion of all other things. 
   Consider your concept of the number two. It seems inconceivable (to me, anyway) that somebody would have a concept of that number but not know that two is one more than one and one less than three. It seems inconceivable that a person would be capable of grasping the proposition Fred has two apples without also grasping the proposition Fred has more than apple and Fred less than three apples, and so on. 
     This suggests that certain pieces of knowledge are constitutive of one’s concept of the number two. One couldn’t possibly believe n=2 if one didn’t believe n=1+1 and n=3-1. This suggests that for one to believe n=2 just is to believe n=1+1, and so forth. 
    Fodor denies this because he thinks it leads to an untenable holism. But it is obviously something we don’t want to give up lightly – and I am now trying to show that it does not lead  to an untenable holism. 
      But there is an  incoherence in what we’ve just said. One cannot have true beliefs about x unless one already has a concept of x. You cannot believe that two is greater than one or less than three unless you already have a concept of the number. 
   So we have to find a way to accommodate two opposing sets of intuitions.   First, it seems inconceivable that one would be able to grasp propositions like n=2 and John has two apples unless one could grasp related propositions (e.g. n is more than one, John has more than one apple). This suggest that having a concept of the number two involves having knowledge of certain rudimentary facts about that number. And this, in its turn, suggests that one’s concept of the number is constituted (at least in part) by knowledge of such truths. 
   At the same time, knowing a true proposition about the number two involves already having a grasp of that number. 
    There is an easy way out of all this. The appearance of contradiction is generated by a false premise. Consider the proposition 

(*) somebody x was uniquely a great philosopher to die of hemlock poisoning. 

(*) describes Socrates. But to grasp (*) it isn’t necessary to already have a concept of a Socrates. 
   Let me a little more precise about what the term “describe” means in this context. (*) is an existential generalization, not a singular proposition. But a generalization is always made true by some singular fact. It isn’t possible just for somebody or other to cough. Some specific person must do so. It must be Smith who coughs – or Jones or Brown. So the proposition somebody coughs is “made true” by the singular fact that Smith coughs. That particular proposition is made true by many different singular facts – by Brown’s coughing, Jones’s coughing, and so no. Given a proposition of the form for some x, x has phi, let us say that O is a “truth-maker” of that proposition iff O has phi is true. So Brown is a truth-maker of the proposition for some x, x coughs because Brown coughs is true. 
    An existential generalization  of the form something x uniquely has phi necessarily has at most one truth-maker. Let us say that a proposition having that form “describes” O iff O uniquely has phi is true. Clearly (*) “describes” Socrates (in our technical sense of the word):  Socrates is its unique truth-maker. 
     Now if you grasp a proposition that describes some thing x, then you are in a position to have further thoughts about x – you are in a position to (truly or falsely) attribute properties to x. Suppose Smith thinks to himself: somebody x was uniquely a great philosopher to die of hemlock poisoning. Smith can then think: and that guy  probably had a most unpleasant death. In fact, for any concepto phi that Smith grasps, Smith can think that guy had phi. Because Smith knows the truth of (*), Smith is now in a position to attribute any property he wishes to the truth-maker of (*). In a word, Smith can think anything he wants about Socrates. 
    You are talking with your friend Smith, whom you know to be a reliable information. Smith says to you: “Somebody just discovered a cure for AIDS.” You don’t know who discovered the cure. But you are still able to say things like “well, that person will be famous”, “that person has done humankind an immeasurable service”, “is that person working for a government agency or for a private organization?”, “I bet that guy has a thing or two to say about current government policy regarding stem-cell research”. Basically, given knowledge of a proposition that describes (in our technical sense) someone or something x, you are able to think things about x. 
     What we just said about Socrates and the (future) discoverer of a cure for AIDS can be applied to anything. Consider the number two. Suppose you know the truth of the following proposition: 

(**) There is some number n such that n=1+1.

   
If you know (**), then you are in a position think things about that number. You can think “I wonder if Smith has that number of cars” and “that number is greater than one” and “any closed figured has more than that number of sides (if its sides are straight).” 
     Knowledge of a proposition that describes a thing apparently suffices for ability to have thoughts about that thing – so knowledge of such a proposition seems to qualify as a concept of that thing. And knowledge of such a proposition does not itself presuppose a concept of that thing. 
     Given all of this, here is what I would propose. To have a concept of a thing is to know some proposition that describes x (in our technical sense of “describes”). Now many will respond by saying that this view has been straightforwardly refuted by Kripke, Putnam, and others. Such a response, I will argue, involves a number of confusions – mainly, a confusion of linguistic meaning with cognitive content. But before I deal with that set of issues, allow me to develop our theory, and also to show why, if correct, it falsifies Fodor’s slippery-slope argument. 
      Suppose you know the truth of (**). First of all, as we’ve seen, it immediately follows that you are able to have thoughts about the thing which (**) describes. (**) describes some number n. If you know (**), then you are able to think n is larger than one and Smith has n cars, and so forth. Second, if you know (**), then you automatically know a certain fundamental truths about n – you know that n=1+1, that n is greater than zero, and so on. 
     Now we can close the argument. Suppose that, as we are maintaining, your knowledge of (**) is your concept of the number two. Let C be your belief in that proposition. In that case, it doesn’t matter what else you come to believe (truly or falsely) about the number two. Obviously C is not, on that account, going to undergo any change; so your concept of that number isn’t going to change. It is true, of course, that the inferential role of that concept will be different: now, given the proposition Fred has two cars, you will be prepared to infer that Bob and Fred have the same number of cars, whereas, previously, you were not prepared to draw that inference. But none of that is going to change your concept of the number two in the slightest. After all, that concept is identical with your belief in (**) (or some other proposition that describes two), and that belief isn’t going to be changed with changes in what you believe about that number. 
    This analysis has another virtue – it sidesteps the “error-objection” to IRS. On our view, not every one of the beliefs you have about the number two is definitive of your concept of that number. Only your belief in (**) is thus definitive. But once you have a belief in (**), you can have any number of wrong beliefs about that number. On our view, to think that the number two has phi is to think something like the following: for some number n, n=1+1, and n has phi.  Now suppose that the number two does not have phi. On our view, you are still having a wrong thought about the number two. Suppose Brown has three cars. Given this, let phi be the property of being equinumerous with the number of cars Brown has. On our view, to think 2=the number of cars Brown has  is to think something like: 

(***) for some number n, n=1+1, and Brown has n cars. 

(***) is a wrong belief about the number two. Your wrong belief about two doesn’t collapse into a correct belief about three. What you’ve done is to attribute to Brown the property of having n cars, where n=1+1. So what you’ve done is to wrongly think that Brown has two cars. So you’ve had a wrong belief about the number two: your mis-application of the concept two didn’t collapse into a correct application of some other concept. 
    Our analysis has one virtue. The objects of thought are not objects but propositions. You don’t think Socrates. You think Socrates is bald or Socrates was wise. It isn’t possible to think a thing – only a truth or falsity about a thing. You don’t think two – you think two is even or 1+1=2. In any case, this seems plausible –luminaries ranging from Kant to Frege to Brandom have held it – and it is worth seeing how far we can go with it. 
    A concept is just is the ability to grasp a thing. But, as we’ve just noted, grasping a thing consists in grasping a proposition about that thing. So it is hard to see how one could exercise a concept of a thing without thinking a truth or falsity about that thing. Our analysis is obviously consistent with this: to have a concept of the number just is to know a certain kind of proposition about it. 
   The other side of the coin is this. Suppose you say that having a concept of (say) the number two does not consist in knowing some proposition. In that case, it seems to follow that you could exercise your concept of that number – you could think about the number two – without thinking anything about it.  Permit me to clarify the logic involved. To have a concept of (say) the number two is to have a grasp of it. But what is grasped is never a thing simpliciter, but only some proposition concerning that thing. So a concept of a thing must be a concept of a proposition about that thing. Otherwise we are saying that one can grasp a thing without grasping any proposition concerning it: we are saying that one can just think two, as opposed to 1+1=2 or two is even.  But, on the face of it, it very much seems that whatever is thought – whatever is grasped – is some truth or falsity, and never just a bare object. In any case, our analysis is on the right side of the view – which seems reasonable to many, though it will not seem so to many others – that it is whole propositions that are thought, and never just bare things.  
     So far we have (tendentiously) been speaking about numbers. Let us apply our analysis to less sterile domains, beginning with a story. You don’t know who invented bifocals. (It was Benjamin Franklin, as it happens.) Somebody whom you know to be a reliable source of information says to you: “Some one person invented bifocals.” On this basis, you are able to have thoughts about that person. You can say things like: “Well, I bet that person was very proud of his invention” and you can ask things like “did that person have poor eyesight? Did that person personally benefit from his discovery?” What is going here seems to be this. You know some true claim of the form: something x uniquely has phi. In this case, the proposition in question is: 

(IBF) some man uniquely invented bifocals. 

That proposition describes (in our technical sense) some man –  namely, Benjamin Franklin. Because you know this proposition, you are able to affirm things, and ask things, and so forth, about that person. So your knowledge of (IBF) gives you the ability to think about that person – it is a concept of that person.
   When you use your knowledge of (IBF) to attribute some property phi to that person, you are really thinking some existence claim: some man uniquely invented bifocals, and that person had phi. So when you use that concept to attribute cleverness to that person, you do so by way of the thought: some man uniquely invented bifocals, and that person was clever. 
     Here we must be very explicit and cautious if we are to stay on the right side of some important semantic and modal points. Your concept of the person who invented bifocals is constituted by your knowledge of proposition that describes that person. You grasp him through the proposition unique inventor of bifocals. But this doesn’t corrupt your modal intuitions in the slightest. You know that that person, whoever it was, didn’t necessarily invent bifocals – that he might have died at the age of three or might have decided to choose a path in life that didn’t involve inventing bifocals. 
      Suppose I say to you: “some guy stole my wallet” (i.e. some man x uniquely stole my wallet). For analogues of the reasons just given, you are able to have thoughts about that person, whoever it is. You can think “he must be a person of low morality” or “he probably had a bad childhood” or “he is probably a drug addict”. So even though your concept of this person is constituted by your knowledge of the existence claim somebody x uniquely stole __’s wallet, you still know that that person, whoever it was, didn’t have to become a thief – that he might have taken a different path in life. He might have become a monk or a university professor. So the fact that, in at least some cases, we know things through existence claims which describe them does not  force us to have the wrong intuitions about modality or analyticity.12 
        Let us take stock. First, as we saw, your knowledge of (IBF) constitutes a concept of Franklin. Second, that concept is obviously not an “atom”. It presupposes a grasp of other concepts – the concept of bifocals, of being an inventor, of being a male, and so forth. (Of course, possession of any given one of these conceptso presupposes possession of others: consider what you must already grasp to grasp the concepto of bifocals or of being an inventor.) The third point is the most important. Now that you know (IBF), and thus have a concept of a certain person, it doesn’t matter what you henceforth think about that person: it won’t alter your concept of him. Suppose you learn that was also witty: that won’t change the concept in question: the concept is constituted by your knowledge of (IBF) – it isn’t going to turn into a new concept, or otherwise change, when you learn new things about him. When you learn that that person was one of the Founding Fathers, your concept of that person isn’t going to change. It is true that, under that circumstance, you will accept some inference that you didn’t previously accept: you will accept the inference from x invented bifocals to x was a Founding Father. But this fact doesn’t mean that your concept of that person suddenly changed: that concept remains what it always has been – a knowledge of an existence claim. By the same token, you can come to believe any number of wrong things about that person: you can come to believe that he was over seven feet tall or that he invented the airplane. Those beliefs will be wrong beliefs about Franklin, not about some other person or thing (and not about no thing either). Remember what we said a moment ago: when you exploit your knowledge of (IBF) to attribute a property phi to the person it describes, you are really thinking an existence claim: some man uniquely invented bifocals, and that person had phi. So suppose you use your knowledge of (IBF) attribute the property of being over sever ft tall to that person. You do this by thinking the following existence claim:

(IBF7)  some man uniquely invented bifocals, and that person was over seven ft tall. 

In thinking (IBF7), you are attributing a property to the inventor of bifocals that that person didn’t actually have. You are having a wrong thought about that person. But this doesn’t threaten the integrity of your concept of that person. Roughly speaking, the concept is the left half of (IBF7); the false belief is the right half. You can accumulate any number of false beliefs about the inventor of bifocals, and that won’t corrupt your concept of the man: put loosely, the concept stays one side of the comma, and the subsequently acquired wrong beliefs remain safely sequestered on the other side of it. 
   So here we have a concept of somebody that is not an atom and that is not vulnerable to any of the arguments that Fodor (or anyone else) directs against IRS. 
     Now our analysis of conception does seem to involve a kind of holism. As we said, to grasp IBF, you must obviously grasp various conceptso. First, you must grasp the conceptso immediately implicated in that proposition – bifocals, inventor, and so on. But, as we noted, a grasp of any one these conceptso presupposes a grasp of others. To grasp the concepto of an inventor, you must (I would think) grasp the conceptso of causality, agency, intentionality (in both senses of the word). To grasp the concepto of bifocals, you must grasp the concepto of eyewear, of bad vision, and therefore of vision itself; and a grasp of the concepto of vision involves the conceptso of space, time, causality (again). So the ability to grasp (IBF) – the ability to have that sort of concept of Franklin – is by no means innocent: it presupposes a background of conceptual weaponry. But it does not follow, and it is not the case, that our analysis of conception is guilty of an untenable form of belief holism.  

§   If our analysis is to be at all compelling, we must deal with a major issue. We have argued that to be able to think about an object O just is to know some true proposition of the form something x uniquely has phi, where phi is a property had by O. We have argued, in effect, that to have a concept of O is to have knowledge of a uniquely individuating description of O. 
     But in light of some points made by Kripke, it is generally taken for granted that this is simply false. Thanks to Kripke, the following is generally taken for granted: one can think about O without having such knowledge; conception is not descriptive in nature; in many cases, the descriptive information one associates with an object is incomplete, and thus applies to many things besides that object, or doesn’t even apply to that object at all. So it would seem that our “descriptivist” analysis of conception is on the wrong side of some very powerful and widely accepted views. 
    The viewpoint just described has its basis in two points made by Kripke. The first is a narrowly semantic point – a point about the literal meaning of proper names (expressions like “Socrates”, “Benjamin Franklin”, and the like). The other point is epistemological. 

§     Let us start with the semantic point. It is a datum that “Socrates” refers to Socrates.  Kripke (1972) made a strong case that proper names are not synonymous with definite descriptions. Contrary to what was previously thought, “Socrates” is not synonymous with “the great philosopher who drank hemlock” (or any other definite description). 
      This strongly suggests that “Socrates” does not refer to Socrates by way of any description, and that it refers to him directly. Thus “Socrates” is directly referential: it is a mere label for a person, not a description that singles out that person. From this, it seems to follow that to understand “Socrates” is to know what it refers to: nothing more, nothing less. To understand that expression is to associate it with the right individual, not some description or Fregean sense.
    Any English speaker can refer to Socrates by means of the word “Socrates”. Presumably, if a person can understand sentence like “Socrates was wise”, then that person is able to grasp what is meant by that sentence. And that, in its turn, would involve grasping the things meant by the components of that sentence – in particular, by “Socrates”. For reasons stated a moment ago, it seems that the thing meant by “Socrates” is simply Socrates – it isn’t a description or Fregean sense that singles out Socrates. 
     This brings us the Kripke’s epistemological point. Kripke argued13 that people don’t typically know “uniquely individuating descriptions” of the objects to which they refer and about which they think. Any English speaker can understand the sentence “Socrates is wise”. But if asked to produce a description that uniquely applied to Socrates, nine out of ten people couldn’t do so. They would be able to produce some description, but not that one applied to Socrates to the exclusion of everyone else, and perhaps not even one that applied to him at all. They might say “he was the author of the Metaphysics” (false) or “he was a famous philosopher of antiquity” (incomplete, applies to people besides Socrates) 
    This seems to show that knowledge of a description that singles out x is not necessary for thinking about x. Smith may be able to think about Socrates and refer to him; but the only description Smith can associate with Socrates is some faulty or overly inclusive one (“author of the Metaphysics”, “philosopher of yesteryear”, “philosopher who died of unnatural causes”). 

§      Let me begin by identifying my position – this will involve stating my biases. First, I myself agree wholeheartedly with Kripke’s semantic point. “Socrates” is not synonymous with “the great philosopher who drank hemlock” or any other definite description. Kripke’s arguments for this are extremely compelling. In connection with this, I also agree that “Socrates” is directly referential: at the level of semantics, “Socrates” is simply a label for Socrates. So the proposition meant, at the level of literal meaning, by “Socrates was bald” is simply Socrates was bald: it isn’t somebody x was uniquely a great philosopher who drank hemlock, and x was bald or anything of the sort. 
     Here is where I disagree with the story told in the last few pages. First of all, literal meaning is not epistemology. We must be very careful to distinguish what is literally meant by an expression, on the one hand, from what it communicates to us. I am not alluding to the kinds of non-literal meanings discussed by Grice, but to something much more radical. There is a difference between hearing the sound “Socrates was wise”, on the one hand, and knowing what it means, on the other. One has to compute the meaning of the sounds; and this inevitably involves a great deal of background knowledge. The background information through which computes literal meaning is to be distinguished from literal meaning itself. Much of what a sentence-utterance communicates to us is connected with that background information. Kripke is (I believe) exactly right about what is literally meant by “Socrates”: that expression is not a definite description. But given only that fact, nothing follows regarding the information through which one assigns the right literal meaning to “Socrates was bald”, and other sentences containing “Socrates”. And, I will argue, the information through which one assigns the right literal meaning includes knowledge of the right kind of uniquely individuating description. That description will seldom, if ever, be a historically momentous one, like “the great philosopher who drank hemlock”; it will typically be rooted in the peculiarities of the context in which one first encounters the relevant referring term. But, I will argue, knowledge of a uniquely individuating description is always involved in knowledge of what “Socrates” means and what it refers to. Kripke’s argument to the contrary has weight only because it focuses on the wrong uniquely individuating descriptions. 
  
§ The best way to begin is with Kripke’s own positive account of reference and conception. In his view, one is able to refer to Socrates, and to cognitively access the man, not by virtue of knowing some individuating description, but by virtue of having a certain causal connection to the man.14 
     The main idea is that a causal, rather than a descriptive, connection to x is what underwrites the ability to refer to, and think about, x. And this idea seems to have a prototype in the fact that to sense-perceive an object x is not (merely) to have a mental image that “fits” x, but is to have a mental image that has the right causal connection to x. (If you have a mental image with the right phenomenology, but the wrong cause, it isn’t a perception of the dog in front of you – it is a hallucination or, perhaps, a perception of some other dog.)

§      What is the theory of reference that Kripke outlines? 15 16  Let’s say I don’t know of any uniquely individuating description of Socrates. Still, I can refer to and think about the man. How? Somebody encounters Socrates for the first time. (Presumably this is when Socrates is born, but that doesn’t matter in this context.) That person dubs his new acquaintance “Socrates”.17 Socrates goes about, introduces himself. Some people have the good fortune to personally see Socrates and be told that he is called “Socrates”. 
    Those people obviously can refer to Socrates. And they can transmit that ability to others. They can say: I knew this fellow named “Socrates”. He was the most obstreperous person I ever met…Having heard (or even just overheard) this, the auditor of that statement can himself refer to, and think, about Socrates. This kind of transmission can go on ad infinitum. 2,500 years after Socrates’ death, we can refer to him, thanks to a long chain of such transmissions. 

§    Let us now critique this picture, beginning with a purely terminological point. In this context, I will talk a great deal about “descriptions”. Sometimes we use that word to denote certain kinds of linguistic entities, e.g. “the man who stole my wallet”, “a great general of antiquity”. In this context,  I will use that expression to refer to the information expressed by such linguistic entities; so I will use the term “description” to refer to the concepts expressed by things like “the greatest French soldier” and the like. 
     Now to matters of substance. Suppose that your companion points someone out to you and says: “that guy is Fred”. As a result, you learn who “Fred” names. Here it seems as though you learn who “Fred” names without knowing any true proposition of the form: something x uniquely has phi and “Fred” names x. 
     But that is not the case. Whenever an object is successfully indicated to you, you do have knowledge of a uniquely individuating description of it. If your friend’s ostensive definition of “Fred” is to work, you must be able to single out the thing ostended. He cannot just be a guy. He must be some specific guy. And he is – the right kind of uniquely individuating information is easy to come by. He is the unique guy standing over there, next to that water fountain. Or he is the unique object of your attention at this moment in time. Or he is the unique guy now running away from you with your wallet. 
    The uniquely individuating description through which you lock onto Fred may be, and probably is, highly context-specific -- replete with the kinds of things that, in language, are expressed by demonstratives (that guy over there…). But here what is important is that the lock-on involves knowledge of some description that singles Fred out: the exact nature of this description is irrelevant. 
     Let us sum up this leg of the argument. Your friend says “that [pointing to someone] is Fred”. If you are to assign “Fred” to the right person, you must have some way of cognitively singling that person out. Doing this involves knowing some description that Fred alone satisfies. That description may be, and probably is, highly context-specific and thus of no historical moment (the unique guy who just bumped into my car and then drove away without giving me his insurance information…) But that is irrelevant in this context – what is relevant is you know of some uniquely individuating description.
      There is more to say. An ostensive definition typically involves an indexical –something that, in English, usually involves a “this” or a “that”. Now an indexical always picks out the thing satisfying a certain description. “That man” picks out the thing satisfying the description contextually salient male or perhaps ostended male. “Today” picks out the thing satisfying the description day of utterance. “I” picks out the thing satisfying the description speaker of utterance. The same holds (mutatis mutandis) for any other indexical. So order for an indexical to work – in order for it to direct the auditor to the right thing -- the thing thereby referred to has to satisfy some existence claim: it must be a thing x such that x uniquely satisfies a certain description. (Let IDL be an arbitrary indexical-token.) And the auditor assigns the right referent to IDL only in so far as he knows some true claim of the form there is some x such that x uniquely satisfies description D, and IDL refers to x. So even ostension, and thus ostensive definitions, operate through the medium of uniquely individuating descriptions: and assigning the right referent to the ostension involves knowing the right such  description.

§      Let us now reconsider Kripke’s story in light of these platitudes.  Imagine that there people who personally saw Socrates, and were told: that guy is named “Socrates”. (To simplify discussion, let us naively suppose that the word they heard really was “Socrates”.) Each of these people knows some true proposition of the form: somebody x uniquely has phi and “Socrates” names x.  For the reasons considered a moment ago, each one of these privileged few learns the truth of a proposition like:  “Socrates” denotes the unique person over there, next to the hearth, talking about the One, wearing a purple toga…
      Some of these people might actually meet Socrates. In that case, once again, one has a uniquely individuating description. Each of these people learns the semantics of “Socrates” through a description like: “Socrates” denotes the person who I shook hands with at time t, place p, who irritated me by contesting my definition of piety… (The description has reference-fixing, not meaning giving, role.)
     Suppose that Larry is one of the people who where given an ostensive definition of “Socrates”. So Larry saw Socrates, possibly met him, and was told: that guy, over there…is named “Socrates”.  
      Larry’s uniquely individuating description almost certainly has an indexical component (the indexicals are in boldface). Larry is told that “Socrates” refers to that guy. Larry sees (or otherwise sense-perceives) Socrates: So Socrates is given to Larry through information like (speaking from Larry’s perspective): the guy who I’m talking to right now or the guy ten feet from me... 
     But that doesn’t in any way mean that Larry doesn’t have a uniquely individuating description of Socrates. He does have such a description. Many uniquely individuating descriptions contain an indexical component.18
      Let us continue the story. Larry outlives Socrates. Talking to his buddy Fred, Larry says (in Ancient Greek): I knew this guy named “Socrates”; that guy did such and such…
Fred knows a true proposition of the form: something x uniquely has phi, and “Socrates” names x. In this case, phi=the property of being uniquely referred to by Fred on occasion C.  So on the basis solely of this meager bit of reportage, Fred has a uniquely individuating description of “Socrates”, namely: the guy to whom Larry was referring on occasion C (at place p, time t)…     
   Here a couple of points are in order. First of all, there is no circularity in this account. Larry had a uniquely individuating description of Socrates. That is beyond doubt. Now Larry’s description was not circular: it did not have the form: “Socrates” names the guy called “Socrates”. Larry’s uniquely individuating description (uniquely individuating description) was something like: “Socrates” refers to that guy – the one next to the hearth in the purple toga…
     Now Fred’s uniquely individuating description of Socrates isn’t circular either. Fred’s uniquely individuating description is something like: “Socrates” denotes the guy to whom Larry was referring on such and such occasion…So Fred’s concept of Socrates consists in Fred’s knowledge of the proposition: there is some x such that, on such and such occasion, Larry was referring to x, and “Socrates” names x.) Fred’s uniquely individuating description is parasitic on Larry’s. But Larry’s description isn’t circular, and neither is Fred’s. 
     Another point must be made. Larry could introduce Socrates through a highly impoverished description: But even so, Larry has a uniquely individuating description  of Socrates. This point is crucial and, so far as I know, has always been overlooked. 
    Suppose Larry says:  once I met this chap named “Socrates”. He was a real jerk. I wish I’d never met him. I’m sorry I brought him up.  Let’s not talk about him anymore.  
   It might seem at first that, under the circumstances, Fred doesn’t have a uniquely individuating description of Socrates – that he has only an overly inclusive description: some jerk who Larry met. 
     But that is not so. Fred does have a uniquely individuating description : the guy who Larry was referring to at place P, time T…For there was one guy who to whom Larry was referring at that exact instance – at the specific time when Fred first heard the name “Socrates”. So the description through which the semantics of “Socrates” is given to Fred (in the reference-fixing, not the meaning-giving, sense) is uniquely individuating and accurate, namely: the guy who Larry was referring to at place p, time t… 
   Further, there is no way that the ability to refer to Socrates could be transferred from Larry to Fred (or from any person to any other) except by way of a uniquely individuating description  (I mean a description that in fact singles out the relevant object). Transference of that power, from Larry to Fred, involves, at the very least, Larry’s saying something about Socrates to Fred, or in Fred’s presence. And no matter how cursory that something is, Fred ipso facto has a uniquely individuating description  of Socrates. Suppose that, in Fred’s presence,  Larry utters:

(*) “that Socrates was a real nuisance. I wish he’d just stayed in Athens.”

         Given that (*) is Fred’s only source of information about Socrates, it might seem as though Fred doesn’t even come close to having knowledge of a uniquely individuating description of that philosopher: all Fred has is the incomplete, and possibly false, description “a real nuisance”. But this is not so. Fred knows that, on such and such occasion, there was some x such that Larry was referring to x and also that “Socrates” names x. So given only the meager bit of information embodied in (*),  Fred does know some true proposition of the form something x uniquely has phi and “Socrates” names x. In this case, the proposition in question is: there is some x such that, on such and such occasion, Larry was referring to x, and “Socrates” names x. 19  
          Of course, we can imagine Fred transmitting the powers in question to some third party – say, William. By the logic we just discussed, William’s acquiring these powers involves his (William’s) acquiring a uniquely individuating description  of Socrates. And so on, until the chain we’ve described reaches you, or your grandchildren. 
     It must be pointed out that the only correct uniquely individuating description that Fred has may be one like: the guy to whom who Larry referred on such and such occasion…Beyond that, Fred’s beliefs about Socrates may be quite spurious. Fred may believe that Socrates was a person of low morality, and that he wrote the Posterior Analytics, and so on. By the same logic, the only uniquely individuating description one of us – twenty-five hundred years later  – has of Socrates may be one like: the guy who Frank was referring to that time when…Beyond that, one’s beliefs about Socrates may be spurious. 

§ Let us sum up. There are different ways that one can come to be a competent user of a referring term like “Socrates”. Such competence can be acquired through an ostensive definition (“that guy is named ‘Socrates’”) or through a descriptive definition (“ ‘Socrates’ is the name of the great philosopher who died of hemlock poisoning”. It may acquired on the basis of some threadbare bit of (possibly erroneous) reportage, like (*). But no matter which of these ways is operative, one’s competence to use that word does embody knowledge of a true proposition of the form: something x uniquely has phi, and W names x, where W is the referring term in question. 
    This is not in tension with Kripke’s semantic insights. Kripke is probably right to say that “Socrates” is not synonymous with a description. But semantics is not epistemology. Suppose, for the sake of argument, that the semantic rule for “Socrates” is some bare pairing like “Socrates” refers to Socrates. To grasp that rule, you have to be able to pair off “Socrates” with the right person. So you have to have some way of thinking about that person.  Socrates is not given to you in a vacuum. He is given to you through verbal communications or through your own perceptions. So your epistemic access to Socrates, and therefore the semantic rule just discussed, embodies knowledge of the right kind of uniquely individuating description. But the semantic rule itself is not, at least not no that account, descriptive: it may be a bare pairing. 

§ So embodied in one’s competence to use an expression like “Socrates” is a knowledge of a uniquely individuating description that singles out the referent. But that uniquely individuating description may be highly specific to one’s own circumstances, and may thus be of no interest to historians or anyone else who was interested in Socrates’ biography. Russell – rightly, as I think we are seeing – thought that to refer to Socrates one had to have a uniquely individuating description  of the man.20 But, judging by his examples21, he wrongly took the uniquely individuating descriptions in question to be historically momentous ones: the guy who invented the theory of forms and drank hemlock. He was wrong about the nature of those uniquely individuating description, but right, apparently, that one must have some uniquely individuating description.22  

§ Our account is consistent with the idea that one’s ability to refer to Socrates involves a causal connection between Socrates and oneself. The  account we’ve given is a causal account, even though it is also a descriptivist account. Larry sees Socrates: obviously there is a causal connection there. And that is how Larry gets his uniquely individuating description of Socrates. Fred sees or hears Larry refer to Socrates on some particular occasion: obviously there is a causal connection there. And so on, until this chain reaches you. So you are causally connected to Socrates: and it is this causal connection that enables you to refer to and think about Socrates. But this causal connection is embedded in various uniquely individuating descriptions (or perhaps it would be better to say that these uniquely individuating descriptions are embedded in it). 
    Clearly not just any causal connection between a person and a thing enables that person to refer to that thing. The causal connection operates by way of some conception. I am directly causally connected to many individual atoms (which bounce off many surfaces). But given some one of those atoms – call it “Alpha” – can I refer to Alpha? Is my being hit by Alpha enough for me to refer to it? It seems not. I have to have some way of singling out Alpha in thought. That way of singling out Alpha may – indeed probably will –exploit my causal connection to Alpha. But it is not the causal connection by itself that enables me to think about or refer to Alpha. What gives me that ability is some conception which  exploits  that causal connection. 

§ In a number of publications, Putnam has argued for a “linguistic division of labor”. It might be thought that, given what Putnam says in this connection, we clearly can refer to things without knowing descriptions which pick them out. 
   The idea would be this. Some scientist has knowledge of the elaborate body of theory underlying the idea that (say) there are electrons. On this basis, the scientist is able to think about, and refer to, such things. The ordinary non-scientist does not have the just mentioned theoretical knowledge. But he is still able to think about, and refer to, such things: his ability to do so is parasitic on the scientist’s ability to do so. So the scientist has the right descriptive-theoretical knowledge; the layperson does not; but thanks to the scientist, the layperson doesn’t need such knowledge to think about, or refer, electrons.   
       There surely is a linguistic, and cognitive, division of labor. But it does not follow, and it isn’t the case, that one can refer to electrons, or genes, or anything else, without having knowledge of the right kind of uniquely individuating description. Let’s suppose that scientist Smith knows everything there is to know about electrons; so he knows some theoretical, uniquely individuating description that applies to all and only electrons. One day Smith is talking to his friend Brown, who doesn’t know anything about electrons. Smith says: 

(#) “I am really fascinated by electrons; I want to study them for the next fifty years.”

At that point, Smith quickly changes the subject. 
    Given that (#) embodies everything that Brown knows about electrons, it might seem as though Brown does not have knowledge of a description that applies to all and only electrons. But this is not so. Brown knows that, on such and such occasion, Smith used the term “electron” to refer to a certain type of object.  On the basis of (#), there is some property phi such that Brown does know some true proposition of the form: there some type object X  such that X has phi, and members of X are called “electrons”. In this case, phi is the property of being referred to Smith on such and such occasion. 
      Brown doesn’t know anything theoretically significant about electrons. He doesn’t know how they are different from quarks or atoms. In fact, he doesn’t even know if they are sub-atomic particles. But Brown does have knowledge of a uniquely individuating description that is made true by the type electron. 
    The kind of cognitive and linguistic division of labor still exists. Brown can’t do any scientific heavy-lifting: his uniquely individuating description is useless for that. (So here we have a cognitive division of labor.) Moreover, Brown’s use of the term “electron” presupposes Smith’s knowledge of the relevant theoretical machinery. (So here we have a linguistic division of labor.) But, as we saw, Brown does have knowledge of a uniquely individuating description; and, in this context, that alone is the relevant fact. 
       
§ Let us now generalize some of the points just made. There are several directions of generalization. 
    Suppose that you acquire a concept of Socrates by seeing him. Here, it seems, your concept of Socrates does not embody knowledge of a proposition of the form something x uniquely has phi, where phi is a property that Socrates has. After all, you just see Socrates; he isn’t given to you through a description or, therefore, through an existence claim. 
    But we must remember that perception is necessarily descriptive. The content of your perception is not (just) Socrates; it is a whole state of affairs; you see a thing in a certain place, having certain features, standing next to a rock of a certain shape…So what is given to you by the perception is existential: there is a thing x such that x (and x alone) is in such and such a place and has such and such features. When you see a thing, you cognitively single it out; you cognitively “lock on” to it; and that singling out is accomplished by the descriptive information embedded in your perception. Embedded in your perception is descriptive information that singles out Socrates.
     Of course, your perceiving Socrates involves an ineliminable causal connection with that individual. But that causal connection is embedded within knowledge of descriptive content. More precisely, it has its lair in the “idexical” or “egocentric” components of that description. What is given to you in percetoni is (just) Socrates; it is a man over there, in that place…A person with a qualitatively identical perception could be seeing a state of affairs in some completely different place. The reason you are seeing a state of affairs in that specific place is that you are causally connected a state of affairs in that place: your perception was precipated by photons bouncing off of various things in that specific place. Someone having a perception qualitatively just like yours could be seeing a man in some completely different place. The reason you are seeing a man in that specific place – over there – is that your perception is precipitated by photons having their origins in a satate of affairs involving a man in that place, and not on the other side of the galaxyi. 
   So, yes, a causal connection between yourself and Socrates is indispensable to the fact that you are seeing Socrates, and not his molecular-twin. But that is only because this causal connection is indispensable to your being given the right kidn of descriptive way of singling out Socrates: what is given to you in the perception is a thing x that is uniquely in that place, and also at this particular time, such that x such and such freatures…The causal connection to your environment rivets you to the right state of affairs by way of the egocentric components in the relevant descriptive information. 
   To sum up, when you upload a concept of Socrates by seeing him (or, for analogues of the easons just given, by otherwise sense-perceiving him), your concept of the man does embody knowledge of existential information that singles out Socrates. What is given to you in the perception is a thing uniquely having certain properties – uniquely occuping that place, at this time…. Since Socrates uniquely has the properties in question, you are seeing Socrates. But your seeing Socrates, as we put it, consists in your visually being given a description that singles out Socrates: it consists in your being given existential information that “describes” (in our technical sense) Scorates, and Socrates alone. 
  An exactly similar argument applies to our concepts of natural kinds. Let’s say that you see a specimen of some natural kind – say water – and, on that basis, upload a concept of that natural kind. So you are able to have thoughts about water; but you don’t know that water consists of H2O molecules. Are we to say that, under this circumstance, you don’t know of a uniquely individuating description of the form some type X of object uniquely has phi, where phi is a uniquely property had by water?
     No. Let us consider your perception. Let S be the specific specimen of water that you are seeing. Remember what we said about Socrates. The exact same thing is true of S. Your seeing S consists in your being given descriptive information that singles out S. Your causal connection to S is crucial – but only because it is crucial to your being given the right descriptive information. Your seeing S consists in your visually being given a whole scenario:

(*) there is some body of transparent liquid x  such that x is uniquely over there, in that glass…., 

where S is the relevaqnt body of liquid. That existential information uniquely “describes” S, in our technical sense of the word; and that is why you are seeing S.  So your concept of S embodies knowledge of the right kind of uniquely individuating descriptive information.
    The same is true of your concept of the corresponding natural kind. By supposition, you acquire a concept of the natural kind water by seeing some specimen of that kind: you see S. So your concept of water is given to you through the description the kind of which S is an instance. But remember that your concept of S, in its turn, consists in your knowledge of a description – namely (*) that describes S. So your concept of water is given by the description:  

(**) the kind X such that,  there is some body of transparent liquid x  such that x is uniquely over there, in that glass…and X is the kind of which x is an instance. 

So your concept of water is given by your knowledge of an existence claim, namely: 

(***) There is some kind X  such that,  there is some body of transparent liquid x  such that x is uniquely over there, in that glass…and X is the kind of which x is an instance, 

where water is the unique natural kind “described”, in our technical sense by (***). 
   The reason that your perception gives you a concept of water, as opposed to twin-water, is that you have a causal connection to a specimen of water. But, as we’ve seen, that causal connection is indispensable only because it is indispensable in giving you the right descriptive information; that causal connection rivest the egocentric components of that description (over there…now…) to the right place and time: a place and time where the salient state of affairs is one involving water, as opposed to some other substance. 
    It will be said that: 

  One’s concept of water cannot possibly consist in knowledge of some existential information like (***); for no one has any recollection of their first perception of water; any such recollection vanished long ago. Perhaps one’s concept is initiated by such knowledge. But that information soon drops out, leaving one with a pure, object-tracking awareness. 

     I deal with this sort of consideration at the end of this paper. 
     Let us sum up what we’ve seen so far. In some cases, one acquires a concept of a thing by hearing about it – words are involved. We’ve seen that, whenever that is the case, one’s concept of that thing involves knowledge of the right kind of existential proposition. In some cases, one acquires a concept of a thing in a more direct way: one sees it (or hears it…). We’ve seen that, in that case, one’s concept of that thing embodies knowledge of the sort of proposition just described. 
   But there is another way of “uploading” a concept of a thing. One can infer its existence. This is we learn about so-called theoretical entities and kinds. But, of course, not all things learned of in this way are posited in the course of scientific theorizing. Suppose you find that your house has been burgled. On the basis of the evidence, you realize that there was a single burgler.  It seems that you have a acquired a concept of a certain individual through inference; but, of course, that individual is not a “theoretical entity”, at least  not in the sense in which electrons are. 
     It is pretty clear that when we acquire a concept of a thing through inference, our concept embodies knowledge of the proposition just described. Consider the case of the burgler. What you know is this: 

(#) there is some x such that x uniquely burgled my house….

On this basis, you can think things about the burglar: that guy must be on drugs; that guy’s father must have been an overly lax discplinarian…You are able to have thoughts about some specific individual because you know (#). It is your knowledge of that proposition that enables you to think about that burglar. So your knowledge of (#) constitues your concept of the burgler.  
     The same thing (mutatis mutandis) applies to “theoretical” entities. Astronomers had to infer the existence of Uranus. Given the behavior of things which they could see, they knew of the existence of something that they couldn’t see. What they inferred was not Uranus (objects cannot be inferred, only propositions about objects); what they inferred was this: 

(##) given that such and such bodies are behaving in such and such a way, there must be some x having such and such properties (having a certain location and mass…). 

 Astronomers were able to have thoughts about Uranus because they knew some proposition like (##) – some propsitoin which describes it. 
    The same is true (mutatis mutands) of our concepts of theoretical kinds. Given the fact that there are such and such observable phenomena, we know that there must such and such unobserbable entities. What we know is: 

(###) given that there are such and such observable there must be such and such unobserbable bodies, having such and such properties,  behaving in such and such a way… 

In other words, what we know is something like: 

(###)given that there are such and such observable there must be some kind of object X such that there are instances of x, 

where (###) describes the natural kind electron. 
   Our knowledge of inferred entities and kinds is blatantly descriptive. It is clear that our knowledge of such things consist in our knowledge of the right kind of descriptive propostitions. 
    We have found that, surprisingly, the same is true of non-inferred (directly perceived) entities, and also of entities that we learn about through (verbal) reportage. 
     It thus seems, where any external object x is concerned, one’s concept of x embodies knowledge of existential information that “describes” x, in our technical sense of the word. (Whether the same is true of our own mental states is a question I leave aside.) Thus far, we have fouind no exceptions to the principle that conception consists in knowledge of the right kind of existence claim.  

§ In any case,  none of Kripke’s (or Putnam’s) semantic insights threaten the idea that one’s ability to use an expression that refers to Socrates embodies knowledge of a true proposition of the form: something x uniquely has phi, and “Socrates” refers to x. Knowledge of such a proposition is apparently presupposed by the ability to use an expression to refer to Socrates. 

§ Now we can return from the steamy jungles of epistemology to the cool waters of semantics. Given what Kripke argued (not to mention Putnam, Soames, and others), it seems pretty likely that *Hesperus has phi* has for its literal meaning the proposition: Hesperus has phi. But nobody will deny that  *Hesperus has phi* and *Phosphorous has phi* have (or may have23) very different cognitive values. Some have reacted to this latter fact by trying to come up with a new and better form of descriptivism. But given what we said a moment ago, I don’t think such a drastic measure need be taken. 
    We saw that -- notwithstanding what is, or seems to be, alleged in Naming and Necessity -- in order to know what is meant by “Socrates”, one does have to know some existence of the claim of the form: something x uniquely has phi, and “Socrates” refers to x. Now when you hear a sentence-token, you don’t automatically know its meaning. In principle, one can hear the sound without knowing the meaning. (This would happen if you didn’t speak the relevant language or if you had sustained brain-damage of a certain kind.) You must make your way from the sound to the meaning. You can’t do that in a vacuum; you have to exploit your background knowledge. As we saw, if you know what (to switch examples) “Hesperus” refers to, it is by way of some existence claim, which might be something like:

(#H)  yesterday  there was a unique star x such that I was gazing at x and x alone remained in the morning sky after all the others had disappeared; moreover “Hesperus” names x.

  If you are to understand an utterance that you hear of *Hesperus has phi*, you have to hook up that token of “Hesperus” with the right referent. And to do that, you have to exploit the existence claim that embodies your knowledge of what it refers to. So to assign the right referent to “Hesperus”, you have to work through some existence claim like (#): that existence claim (or some other) is your only lead. So even though what *Hesperus has phi* literally means is simply Venus has phi, nonetheless you can assign it the right meaning only via (#). So what “Hesperus is lovely” ends up imparting to you is some descriptively rich existential proposition: 

(#HL) yesterday  there was a unique star x such that I was gazing at x and x alone remained in the morning sky after all the other stars  had disappeared; moreover “Hesperus” names x; and x is lovely. 

    For exactly similar reasons, what “Phosphorous is lovely” conveys to you will be something like: 

(#PL) yesterday  there was a unique star x such that I was gazing at x and x alone appeared in the evening sky before all the other stars; moreover “Phosphorous” names x; and x is lovely. 

So even though “Phosphorous  is lovely”  has for its literal meaning some descriptively impoverished singular proposition (Venus is lovely), nonetheless what it conveys to you – thanks to the descriptive information through which you assign it the right meaning – is some descriptively rich existence claim. It is clear why, given these principles, “Hesperus=Phosphorous” will communicate a complicated existence claim, even though what it literally means is some bare identity.

§   This analysis is on the right side of Kripke’s powerful modal and semantic points. Consider the sentence: 

(*) “Hesperus is the last star to disappear from the morning sky.” 

Kripke makes the (correct) point that (*) is not analytic. “Hesperus is  not the last star to disappear from the morning sky” is not self-contradictory. 
   Our analysis is consistent with this. Let us suppose, once again, that the proposition through which you assign “Hesperus” to Hesperus (Venus) is this:

(#H)  yesterday  there was a unique star x such that I was gazing at x and x alone remained in the morning sky after all the others had disappeared; moreover “Hesperus” names x.

Notice that “Hesperus” gets narrow-scope with respect to the descriptive information. Nothing – no descriptive information, no Fregean sense – comes between Hesperus names and the thing named. To use Kripke’s important distinction, the descriptive information has a “reference-fixing” but not a “meaning-giving” role. So you know that “Hesperus” is just a name, and not a description, and that all it does is to label a certain thing. So on our analysis (*) is not analytic – at the level of literal meaning, it encodes a proposition of the form O the last star to disappear from the morning sky. It does not encode a proposition of the form the last star to disappear from the morning sky is the last star to disappear from the morning sky.  
   Further, on our analysis, you know that (*) is not analytic: you have the right intuition about this. You assign “Hesperus” to Hesperus by way of your knowledge of (#H). In that proposition, the descriptive information is given “wide-scope”. So you know that no descriptive information comes between “Hesperus” and the thing it labels; you know that “Hesperus” is just a label, and not a description. So you know that (*) is not analytic. So you have the right intuitions where the modal status of the sentence is concerned. 
    In connection with this, our analysis is consistent with the fact that you also have the right intuitions about the modal status of the proposition meant by (*) and also about the modal properties of the thing named by “Hesperus”. Suppose that the (#H) is the proposition through which you affix “Hesperus” to right entity. In knowing (#H),  you know that “Hesperus” names the celestial body which in fact disappears from the morning sky after any other. But you will believe that the thing which “Hesperus” names had to have that property. In virtue of knowing (#H), you know that something x in fact is a celestial body that disappears after all others from the morning sky. Your knowledge of (#H) is not knowledge to the effect that something had to have that property. That knowledge is consistent with the position that the thing which in fact had that property might not have had it at all. For any object x having that property, your knowledge of (#H) is consistent with your believing the truth of the proposition x might not have been a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky.  Put in positive terms, for any object x, your believing (#H) is consistent with your believing the proposition x might not have been a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky.
   Another example might be appropriate. Suppose you believe the proposition 

(**)  “Benjamin Franklin” names the unique person x who in fact invented bifocals. 

There is no object x such that, in virtue of believing (**) to be true, you believe that x had to invent bifocals. Put in positive terms, for any object x, your believing (**) is consistent with your believing the proposition x did not have to invent bifocals – x might have done something else with his life. So our descriptivist account of conception does not saddle anyone with the wrong modal intuitions about propositions or objects. 
     On our descriptivist account, you do indeed think of Hesperus (Venus) by way of some descriptive proposition. But you still have the right modal intuitions. This is because your concept of Venus consists in knowledge of a proposition of the form something x in fact has phi: it does not consist in knowledge of a proposition of the form something x necessarily has phi.  
      One other point should be made explicit. On our account, it is necessary that you think of Hesperus by way of some claim of the form something x uniquely has phi. But there is no one proposition of that form such that you must think of Hesperus by way of that particular proposition. On the contrary, it is essential to our analysis that it be possible to think of Hesperus by way of different propositions of that form. That feature of our analysis is essential to our way of solving Frege’s puzzle. So our account does not by any means make it necessary that you think of Hesperus as the last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky. It allows that you can think of it through infinitely many different descriptions. 
      That said, it might seem that there is still a sense in which our analysis is not modally innocuous. On our account, you think of an object O s by way of your knowledge of proposition  of the form something x uniquely  has phi, where phi is a property had by O. So, on our account, you think of Hesperus through some such proposition. Of course, our account allows that there are several such propositions. But, for the sake of argument, suppose that in your case, there is only one such proposition; and suppose it is: 

(****) something x is  uniquely being  a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky.  

So on our account, when you think Hesperus has phi, you are really thinking: 

(*****)  something x in fact has the property of uniquely being  a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky, and x has phi. 

So what you think when you think Hesperus is lovely is: 

something x in fact has the property of uniquely being  a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky, and x is lovely. 

A special case of this principle is that, when you think 

(A) Hesperus is the last a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky, 

what you are thinking is: 

(B)  something x is  uniquely being  a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky, and something y  is  uniquely being  a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky, and x=y. 


  Here is the apparent problem for our analysis. The proposition: 

(AN) Necessarily, Hesperus is uniquely a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky, 

 is simply false, and nobody thinks otherwise. But what about (B)? At first glance, (B) looks like the kind of proposition that might be necessary. If that is the case, then our analysis is false. 
  The truth is that our analysis does not put us on the wrong side of any modal facts. 
    Let us consider the operator necessarily. This operator can combine in different ways with (B): more exactly, it can be given varying degrees of scope. 

(B1) Necessarily:  something x is  uniquely a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky, and x is identical with a unique a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky. 

(B2) Something x is  uniquely a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky, and necessarily: x is identical with a unique a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky. 


(B1) and (B2) are simply false; and nobody would ever think otherwise. So in the relevant respects, they just like (AN). So our analysis does not turn true modal claims into false ones, or vice versa. 
    Nonetheless, it might seem that our analysis has a peculiar consequence. We have said that you think of Hesperus through either (****) or through some other proposition of the same form. So it seems that, on our analysis, you must think of Hesperus a certain way: you must think of it as a last celestial body to disappear from the morning sky or a first celestial body to appear in the evening sky: in any case, you must think of it through some uniquely individuating description. But this seems wrong: for there doesn’t seem to be any that anyone has to think of Hesperus. For reasons we’ve seen, it seems that cognitively “locking onto” a thing O involves knowing some proposition of the form something x uniquely has phi, where O has phi. But after that lock-on has been established, I don’t have to think about O by way of that proposition. I can drop the proposition. Suppose that I lock onto Sam by having a visual perception of him. In that case, as we saw, I do  lock onto Sam by way of some proposition of the form of something x uniquely has phi. In this case, that proposition might be somebody x is uniquely a person standing over there, at this time…or perhaps somebody x is uniquely a person whom I am focusing on at this time… So forging a concept of a Sam involves knowing some such proposition. But once that concept has been forged, I can, and probably will, forget that proposition. Suppose Sam becomes a life-long acquaintance of mine. I will almost certainly not remember the proposition through which I initially locked onto him. So it seems that, after a certain point, the uniquely individuating proposition can simply be dropped: after which point, one has a “pure”, non-descriptive, object-tracking concept. So, after a certain point, one does not have to think of Sam (or anything else) by way of some descriptive proposition.  If that is right, then obviously our analysis is false. After all, our analysis nearly enough just is the claim that conception is knowledge of some such description. 
    Here is what I will argue. Any given descriptive proposition can be dropped, and probably will be. But at no point does conception become “pure”. What happens is simply that one’s knowledge of the old proposition is replaced with knowledge of a new (but related) proposition. At any given point in the career of one’s concept of a thing, one’s ability to think about that thing consists in one’ s knowing some such proposition. But there is typically not some one such proposition such that, any any point in the career of one’s concept of a thing, one must think about that thing through that specific proposition. Let us now turn to this matter.


§     One can easily forget the information through which one first acquires a conception of an object. Indeed, this is what happens most of the time. I meet Sam in 1985. At that point, I am told: “that [pointing to some guy on the jungle gyms, wearing a hat with a propeller on it…] is Sam”. So it is indeed through some kind of existence claim that I hook up the name to the right person: there is some guy x who was just pointed out to me, and whom I am now  looking it, who is  over there on the jungle gyms, wearing a hat with a propeller on it…and “Sam” names x.  But it would be very easy for me to forget that “start-up” existence claim. In fact, with very few exceptions, I never remember those start-up claims; they drop out. 
   This might be taken to show that, at some point, I acquire a “pure” conception of Sam: a conception that is no longer paved with knowledge of existential-descriptive information. So the idea would be this. Perhaps knowledge of a uniquely individuating description was needed to initiate the concept. But after that, it isn’t needed anymore. 
     I think this is a big mistake. The “start-up” existential information certainly does drop out. I may not remember, even sub-consciously, the circumstances under which I met Sam. But this absolutely does not mean that, at any point, I have some kind of “pure” conception of him, i.e. one that is not paved with existential information. Indeed, if such “pure” conceptions were possible, it is hard to see how it could be possible for Hesperus/Phosphorous cases to arise. But, I fully grant, the point in question definitely requires that we supplement our analysis. 
    Suppose my first encounter with Sam is through existential information like: there is guy wearing a green shirt and a bowler hat, whom I am now (on occasion t) meeting and…and, consequently, that such information is, at least initially, implicated in my interpretetings of “Sam”. 
   I meet Sam again, four days later. And I do so with knowledge: I recognize him. What is happening here? My recognizing him obviously doesn’t consist in my becoming aware of some bare identity; it doesn’t consist in its being the case, that for some object O, I suddenly become aware that O is identical with O. No doubt we do recognize the truth of such bare identities. But that is not what recognition consists in. Recognition is not so informationally impoverished. 
   The story I would tell is this. I realize that there was some chap whom I met a few days earlier, on occasion t, who had such and such features (e.g. he was wearing a bowler hat)…and I also realize that, right now, on occasion t*, there is some chap, who has thus and such properties (e.g. he is wearing a baseball cap)…and I also realize that there is some one individual who uniquely satisfies both of these existential propositions. 
     Let E be the first existence claim, and let E* be the second.
     We see that recognizing a thing consists in seeing that some one thing uniquely satisfies each of two existence claims. This means that E -- the “start-up” existential information -- can be dropped.  My recognizing Sam involves my seeing that some one entity satisfies both E and E*. Having made this recognition, I am at liberty to drop E. My awareness of Sam will be sustained, for the time being, by my knowledge of E*. And, in its turn, E* may be dropped and replaced by a third existence claim. 
    So, I would argue, what sustains a conception of an entity is knowledge of a series of interlocking  existence claims. Any given one of these claims may be dropped, and probably will be. But at any juncture in the career of one’s having a conception of a thing, that conception involves knowledge of an existence claim. And this point, as we’ve seen, enables us to account (within a Kripke-friendly semantic system) for the cognitive difference between “Hesperus is lovely” and “Phosphorous is lovely”.24   

   
      

1 Although the word ‘concept’ is ambiguous, that ambiguity is not as radical as that associated with words like ‘bank’ and ‘rent’. Presumably, a mental entity qualifies as a concepto in the psychological sense – as a grasp of something – if it somehow encodes a concepto in the objective sense. I grasp the concepto of triangularity – which is a non-mental entity – by virtue of having a mental content which somehow encodes that concepto. So a concept in the psychological sense is a mental entity which encodes a concepto in the objective sense. 
   Also both concepts and conceptso are modes of presentation. The concepto class of all points equidistant from a given point is a mode of presentation of the property of sphericity, and so is the concepto closed three-dimensional figure of uniform curvature. So underneath the superficial ambiguity of the word “concept”, there are identities of meaning.

2 Of course, you could think about your grasp of Socrates. But  what enables you to think about Socrates is that you have a concept of Socrates, not that you grasp your concept of Socrates. You don’t have to grasp your own concepto – your own grasp -- of Socrates to think about Socrates. 

3 I think that intentionalists might say that the very ability to have the phenomenology involves a background of representational abilities. 
4 Fodor (1998:13).
5 Fodor (1998:35).
6 Fodor (1998: 80-86).
7 Fodor 1981e.
8 Fodor (1981e:283-292).
9 Fodor (1981e:283-292).
10 Fodor (1998:46-47).
11 See Kuczynski 2004b, where the following argument is given in much more detail.
12 The reason is that we give “wide scope” to the descriptive information. I tell you “some guy stole my wallet.” You then think to yourself: he didn’t have to become a thief – he might have become a police officer. Here you are not thinking: it is possible that somebody x uniquely stole __’s wallet and also that x did not become a thief. What you are thinking is:  somebody x uniquely stole __’s wallet and there is a possible circumstance where  that x did not become a thief. So the descriptive information is given wide scope with respect to the modal operator. Even though it is always through descriptive information that we acquire concepts of objects (or so I will argue), that doesn’t corrupt our modal intuitions; for we give the descriptive information “wide scope” with modal operators.
13 Or seemed to argue: see below
14 Jerry Fodor (1998) has gone so far as to say that a causal connection to x is all that is involved in having a concept of x. So I can have no beliefs about the number and yet have a conception of it: I need only have a casual connection to it (or, more accurately, some instance of it). I need only have a causal connection to Socrates to be able to think about him. I needn’t know anything about him. My book__ is a discussion of Fodor’s atomism and his arguments for it.
15 It is possible that what Kripke says is not so much that people know of no individuating descriptions of the things they think about and refer to. His point is that the individuating descriptions are not the ones that Russell (and possibly Frege) thought they were. I think that Kripke himself says something similar to what we say below – when we argue that one does need an individuating descriptions of a very special kind to refer to an object. (I won’t press these exegetical points. I will argue only for the point that none of Kripke’s cogent points to any degree warrant the rejection of the “descriptivism” I have been urging.)
16 What I will say goes a bit beyond what Kripke says; my own commentary is interlaced with an exposition of Kripke’s views.
17 More exactly, that person gives Socrates the Ancient Greek equivalent of “Socrates”, whatever that is. In this discussion, we will ignore the fact that, over the years, names may undergo considerable phonemic change. Obviously “Confucius” sounds very little like the name of the old sage. These phonemic changes introduce no philosophical mysteries, but allowing for them would clutter up the exposition considerably.
18 In fact, it is arguable that all such descriptions do, except when the description in question refers to some abstract object, like the number two. The (often hidden) presence of indexicals is needed to prevent problems relating to what Strawson called the “massive reduplication”. Your friend Fred says to you “somebody uniquely invented bifocals; his name is ‘Ben Franklin’”. As it happens, on a distant planet, some other person (or intelligent creature) also invented bifocals. Is Fred wrong? Not if we take him to mean: in this context – in the context of the world we occupy – somebody uniquely invented bifocals. Surely we would not take Fred to rule out the possibility that on some distant planet there were intelligent, bifocal-inventing life-forms. So, in effect, we attribute a hidden indexical to Fred’s statement. For reasons of this kind, we must see our discourse as permeated by indexicality, hidden though it may often be.  

19 Of course, the term “occasion” has to be defined somewhat narrowly. One can refer to twenty different people in a single conversation and thus on a single “occasion”. But at any specific juncture of that occasion – at any one time (leaving aside ambiguity) – one is referring to just one person or object. When I say “occasion” I mean a specific juncture of a discourse.
20 See Russell 1948 (89-99). 
21 Russell may well have chosen historically pregnant examples for purely illustrative reasons.   
22 It isn’t even clear if Russell was wrong about the nature of the uniquely individuating descriptions. It could be that he was simply using historically pregnant descriptions to illustrate his basic point, which is that one must have some uniquely individuating description of Socrates to think about, or refer to, Socrates. If he had illustrated his point with some uniquely individuating description that didn’t obviously apply to Socrates – e.g. the guy to whom Seymour was referring on occasion C…-- nobody would have followed what he was saying. So his use of uniquely individuating descriptions like the philosopher who drank Hemlock may not really indicate his belief that that is an actual uniquely individuating description through which one might refer to, or think about Socrates. It might just be a superficial expository device. But I am not a Russell scholar; so I remain open on this.
23 I say “may” for a couple of reasons. After one learns that (so to speak) Hesperus=Phosphorous, then *Hesperus has phi* may end up coinciding in cognitive value with *Phosphorous has phi*. (Of course, this point has to be adjusted for speakers of other languages.) 
  Also, depending on how one initially learns the meaning of “Hesperus” and “Phosphorous”, *Hesperus has phi* *Phosphorous has phi* might never have had different cognitive values (for that person) to begin with. This will be the case if am introduced to the words by somebody who points to Venus and says: “that  is called both ‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phosphorous’”. 
24  Let me end by considering an objection to this last line of thought (I will put the objection in the mouth of an imaginary locator): 

“You have ex nihilo produced this strange theory of conception as being sustained by knowledge of interlocking existence claims. And you claim that recognition consists in seeing that some one object satisfies two existence claims. But all of this seems very ad hoc – something you’ve confabulated to get your bankrupt theory off the hook.” 

    I think that this comment has force only to the extent that we’ve been jaded by wrong theories of sense-perception and, more generally, of objectual awareness. 
    When you see Bob, embedded in your sense-perception is existential information. You cannot get rid of that existential information without eliminating the perception. This suggests that that existential information is constitutive of the content of the perception. Granted, Bob himself is (part of) the representational content of that perception. But he is given to you via this existential information. 
   So when you see Bob on some occasion t, the content of that perception is given by some bit of existential information like: there is some chap whom I’m now seeing, wearing a bowler hat…
   You see Bob again, on occasion t*. Again, the content of your perception is given by some existence claim: there is some chap I’m seeing, wearing a baseball cap…
   On both occasions, the content of your perception is existential. 
    Suppose that, on t*, you recognize the person you are seeing is the person you saw on t. Your t-perception is given by existential information, and so is your t*-perception. So if, on t*, you recognize that you are seeing the same person you saw on t, that must consist in your realizing that the same entity satisfies both existence-claims are satisfied – that there is some one entity who satisfies both. Once a few platitudes are granted about sense-perception – that sense-perceptions have existential content -- our theory of conception and recognition proves to be far from ad hoc.    

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

1


