 The Economics of Higher Education in the 21st Century 

Table of Contents The Economics of Higher Education in the 21st CenturyPart I Introduction to Part I Retention-rates and Graduation-rates: Introductory Remarks Do Graduation- and Retention-rates Matter? Open-market Companies (OMC’s): How they Differ from Universities Colleges Sell Degrees, not Instruction Enrollment-rates Matter: Retention- and Graduation-rates Don’t Universities: Their Distinctive Business-model How Useful Do Students Really Want Their Educations To Be? The Paradox of Macroeconomic Efficiency When in Doubt, Drop Out: Dispelling the Myth that Only Losers Drop Out Knowledge-management: Introductory Remarks Why Knowledge-management Cannot be of Assistance to Universities Key Points Conclusion of Part 1: How to Maximize Revenue by Optimizing Education The Economics of Higher Education in the 21st Century Part II Introduction to Part II What is Knowledge-management (KM)? An Actual Company that Could Benefit from KM Who Exactly Sounds the KM-alarm? KM as Preventative Measure KM in Relation to Organizations that Sell Results KM in Relation to Organizations that Sell Services Service-organizations Depend on Poor KM KM Impossible Unless Employment and Pay are Performance-dependent No KM without Financial Transparency Expense-padding in Relation to KM A Corollary: Education Must be Digitized Whenever Possible DMO: A New and Better Kind of University All Accreditations Examination-based How DMO Turns Non-STEM Students into STEM Students Emphasis on Instruction as Opposed to Selection More Degree-levels at DMO Instructors Never to Function as Gatekeepers Payments to Go Straight from Student to Instructor The Inverted Payment Pyramid 25 Desiderata that DMO Must Satisfy Conclusion of Part 2 Conclusion of the Present Work

 The Economics of Higher Education in the 21st Century Part I Introduction to Part I In the first part of this two-part work, the economics of higher education will be explained. It will be made clear how a university’s business model differs from that of a company that has to compete on the open market. On this basis, it will be explained: (i) Why universities are in no way threatened by low retention-rates and graduation-rates; (ii) Why universities cannot significantly improve or otherwise alter the quality of their educational services without imperiling their very existences; (iii) Why universities do not have to improve the quality of their educational services; (iv) Why universities couldn’t improve the quality of their services even if they wanted to; (v) Why the fact that many universities have low retention- and graduation-rates does not a represent a business opportunity, or opportunity of any other kind, for anyone, whether inside or outside of academia; and (vi) Why principles of Knowledge Management (KM) that are so useful when it comes to helping businesses that compete on the open market are completely useless, and indeed of negative utility, when it comes to helping universities solve their problems. In the second part of this work, it will be explained how to construct an online university that is both lucrative and also provides instruction that is faster, better, cheaper, and more useful than the instruction provided by any existing (or possible) brick-and-mortar university. It will be explained how the principles of KM can be used to optimize such a university, once it is up and running. Retention-rates and Graduation-rates: Introductory Remarks A university’s retention rate is the percentage of students who stay after the first year. A university’s graduation rate is the percentage of students who graduate within six years of enrollment. These numbers seldom coincide, but they track each other. University’s with high retention rates have high graduation rates, and universities with low retention rates have low graduation rates. Retention rates are necessarily at least as high as graduation rates and in practice are always higher. Also, even if a university has a graduation-rate of 0%, as is the case with a number of institutions, it doesn’t follow that nobody graduates from it, only that nobody does so within six years of enrollment. Do Graduation- and Retention-rates Matter? From a financial perspective, a university has relatively cogent reasons to want a high retention rate: when a student doesn’t enroll for a second year, that university loses business, and it doesn’t when he does. A university has less strong reasons to want a high graduation rate. If a student comes back year after year and never graduates, the university makes more money than it does if he graduates. All of this said, universities with low graduation and retention rates almost always tend to stay in business. Great Basin College in Nevada has a retention rate of 4% and a graduation rate of 0%, but it is not in financial trouble. And Great Basic is not an exception. There are many institutions of higher learning with graduation rates of 0% and retention rates that are only marginally higher, and yet not a single one of them is going out of business. Would universities with low retention rates like to have higher retention rates? Of course. Do they need to have higher retention rates? Evidently not. Is there anything they can do to increase their retention rates? That is the question. The answer: No. If a university made the systemic changes to itself necessary to improve retention rates, it would lose most of its existing customer-base. In the pages to come, it will be explained why this is so, but the main ideas are readily stated. Consider the case of Texas College, a private, religious college, only 10% of whose students major in STEM (Science, Math, Engineering, Technology). Texas College has a 51% retention rate, and a 6% graduation rate. 6% is an extremely low graduation rate: the national average is 53%. 51% is a relatively low retention rate: the national average is around 80%. Why does Texas College have such low retention and graduation rates? One very distinct possibility is that students question whether their earnings after graduation will compensate for the expenses incurred in the course of getting a Texas College degree. In light of this, suppose that Texas College decided to improve its retention rates by making its programs of study more practical---by making them such that those who completed them were better able to compete in the workforce. Would student retention increase? Maybe. Graduation rates? Perhaps. But such changes would alienate 90% of their current customer base. In other words, if they made such changes, they would have far fewer students to retain. And that’s the essence of the matter: retention rates can be increased only decimating enrollment-rates. (Proof below.) Texas College is not a singularity; it is the rule, not the exception. Universities would as a rule lose far more customers than they would gain were they to change their courses of such in such a way as to make them financially more worth doing. It will now be explained why this is so. Open-market Companies (OMC’s): How they Differ from Universities Let us refer to companies that compete on the open market as ‘open market companies’ (or OMC’s). Such companies include Nike, Oscar Meyer, Microsoft, and Hyundai. There is one very important difference between universities and OMC’s. OMC’s sell products and services. That is what people pay them for. That is all they pay them for. That is not what people pay universities for. Universities pay people for degrees. That is what universities sell, and that is what people pay them for; and with relatively minor qualifications, that is all that people pay them for. Universities provide instruction, and they may also provide other services. But people pay them for degrees and for nothing besides. Consider the following hypothetical. William & Mary magically improves the quality of its instruction 100% and it cuts its tuition in half: but it stops issuing degrees. So whatever it is that one can currently learn at William & Mary about physics, psychology or any other subject, one can now learn twice as well for half as much money. But one cannot get a degree in that subject from William & Mary. Under these circumstances, William & Mary’s enrollment rate would plummet, possibly to zero. And its enrollment would definitely plummet to zero if it ceased to give out degrees and it either failed to lower tuition or managed to improve instruction. William & Mary is a reputable institution, and the points just made are even more brazenly true of less reputable institutions. What would happen to Great Basin College in Nevada if it ceased to give out degrees? Or to Dalton State? Or to Oglala Lakota College? Their enrollments would instantly drop to zero. In actuality, each of these colleges does give out degrees and each is financially doing extremely well. Moreover, each of these colleges has a graduation rate of 0% (meaning that 0% of their students graduate within six years); each has a retention rate in the single digits; and none of them does a good job of guaranteeing high ($60,000+) incomes for its graduates. But each is not only financially stable, but positively flourishing. Colleges Sell Degrees, not Instruction Imagine the following. Max is a mathematical genius who has completely mastered his discipline. (We won’t worry about how he did this.) He is as good a mathematician as any human being alive. But he doesn’t have a college degree, and he has never attended college. What can Max do professionally? He cannot be a professor. He cannot publish in academic journals. He cannot be a high-school teacher. He cannot work for an online tutoring agency. He could conceivably work as a freelancer, but he will lack credibility and will have trouble getting clients. If Max wants to ply his trade, he needs a degree, the same way a construction worker needs a union card. So he has to go to college. And if he does go to college, why does he do it? To learn? No. To get a degree. He probably will learn while at college (though he may learn a lot less than if he were not in college, since he may very well be better at teaching himself than his professors are at teaching him). To be sure, Max doesn’t have to go to college. He can become a plumber, a police officer, or an enlisted man in the military. He can also become a comedian, or an actor, or an entrepreneur. But he cannot be a mathematician and be paid for it. (He can do it for free, with the qualification that nobody will read what he’s writing, let alone pay for it.) Nor can have a white-collar job, unless he succeeds as an entrepreneur, which is not likely, given that his lack of a degree will diminish his credibility in the eyes of investors and will also make it unlikely that he will acquire the kind of professional experience that is typically a prerequisite for knowing what the market wants. In any case, if Max does get a degree---even if while getting it he learns nothing and indeed becomes less intelligent---it will make it possible for him to ply his trade and will open up an entire world of additional professional possibilities. Of course, even if Max doesn't get a college degree, he is not completely without hope, since, being a genius, he is relatively likely to pull off the financial equivalent of a hole-in-one. But most people are not geniuses; so let us now consider a hypothetical that makes it clear what happens to non-geniuses who don’t have degrees. Jane is a person of average or marginally above intelligence who has a degree in psychology. Tammy is exactly as intelligent as Jane, both psychologically and otherwise, but does not have a college degree. For Jane, the possibilities are endless. She can become a social worker or licensed therapist. She can go to law school. She can become a Federal Agent. She can get an MBA and become a corporate bureaucrat who is making $120,000/year by the age of 30. She is not guaranteed any of these outcomes, of course, but they are available to her. But what about Tammy? What are her options? She cannot become a licensed therapist. She cannot work for a corporation, except in a menial capacity. She cannot be a social worker. She cannot go to law school. She is quite stuck. Can she become an entrepreneur? Technically, yes. But entrepreneurs have a success rate of 1%; and most of that 1% tend to be intellectually gifted and also have to have college degrees, as well as years of college-degree-based professional experience. Would it make a difference if, instead of being intellectually average, Tammy were in the top 10% of the population? Yes—but not much. Her lack of a degree would bar her from pretty much all white-collar employment, and if she tried her hand at entrepreneurship, she would still be even less likely than most entrepreneurs at succeeding. If Tammy wants white-collar employment, she can try her hand at selling insurance or real estate—and is unlikely to succeed at either, simply because, popular conceptions to the contrary, success-rates in such professions are extremely low. 95% of people who try to succeed as insurance salesman quit within a year; more than quit within three years. Similar figures hold of real estate.1 And those who ‘succeed’ are likely to be making $20,000/year, working 70 hours/week. Setting aside long-shot possibilities, Tammy only has two choices: work in a blue-collar capacity (as a police officer, plumber, secretary, or some such) or go to college. True—if she goes to college, she is likely to rack up debt. But, first of all, she will not even have to begin paying off that debt for many years; and during the intervening years, she can live well, taking classes she enjoys and living a well-funded, leisurely lifestyle. Moreover, even after she has to start paying off her student loans, she will have the option of doing white collar work—of working as a teacher, executive, consultant, or stock-broker. To be sure, she may have some ‘down-time’ working at Starbucks. But as long as she has that degree, she has options: she has the option of going to business school, of working as a supervisor at company, of getting her Master’s in Social Work, or of being a teacher. And some such option is very likely to materialize. And even during her darkest hours as a ‘barista’, she is in a very different position from her fellow baristas who don’t have college degrees. She is passing through; they are not. One often hears about college graduates working at Starbucks and stuck with massive student loans. These horror stories are no doubt oftentimes true. What isn’t true is that it’s not worth it to go to college. In some ways, college is a lottery. If one majors in political science at an undistinguished institution, one is not guaranteed the ability to pay off one’s student loans any time soon. Does that mean that one shouldn’t go to college? No, it does not. And one should go to college-for several reasons. First of all, it is not always a lottery: someone with a degree in chemical engineering is not rolling the dice. Second, even when it is a lottery, it is a lottery worth playing: the proverbial political science graduate from a low-tier school is more than able to get a reasonably decent white-collar job sooner or later. Third, it is a lottery that one can always pull out of: a first- or second-year political science major at a no-name can drop out and cut her losses. She can also switch majors, switch schools, or both. Also, she can hedge by taking a few semesters off, then resuming studies, all the while considering other career options or educational tracks and testing the employment-waters. People with degrees have options, and people without degrees don’t.2 People with useful degrees from high-prestige institutions have many very good options; people with useless degrees from low prestige institutions have fewer options and they are not as good—but they are still good in absolute terms, and they are still plentiful. People without degrees do not have options. They can hustle or they have blue collar jobs. It does not matter how intelligent or skillful they are: without that piece of paper, they are stuck. Colleges sell those degrees. That is what they do. Colleges also provide instruction. Sometimes that instruction is good, and sometimes it’s useful; usually it’s neither. Either way, that isn’t what students are paying for. They are paying for the degree. And since that is what they are paying for, they are willing to put up with very low-quality instruction. In fact, setting aside the 15% or so of students who major in engineering, nursing, and the like, students don’t want particularly high-quality instruction: high-quality instruction is demanding, and since they are paying for degrees, they want to have to jump through as few hoops as possible to get those degrees. To be sure, students are willing to jump through some hoops: students do want to believe that their degrees have meaning. And in some cases those degrees actually do have to have meaning, since the student in question is planning on entering a field, such as dentistry or engineering, where he won’t be able to function if he doesn’t have the requisite knowledge. Also, there are some students who, though not intending to go into practical fields, actually do want to hone their intellects while in college. And if colleges improved instruction—if they made it more demanding and if they those who received them more economically competitive---they would indeed attract more of a certain kind of student: they would attract more savants and truth-seekers, as well as aspiring doctors and engineers. But for each such student that they attracted, they would lose ten students in their existing customer-base. Enrollment-rates Matter: Retention- and Graduation-rates Don’t 	It is assumed that retention-rates must stay above a certain level for a university to be financially stable. If that is true, the rate in question is extremely low. There are many universities with retention-rates of in the single digits that are financially perfectly fine3. To name just a few: Great Basin College, Nevada Oklahoma State University Inst. of Technology, Okmulgee San Houston State University, Huntsville, TX Texas A&M University, Commerce Texas A&M International University, Laredo Alabama State University, Montgomery Macon State College, Macon, GA Dalton State College, Dover, DE In fact, there is does not appear to be a single case of a university failing because of low retention rates, even though there are many that have retention rates that are close to zero. This is possible because it isn’t retention rates that matter: it is enrollment rates. If enough people enroll, then the university is financially ok. It is assumed that if retention-rates are low enough, then not enough people will enroll—the idea being that no one would want to enroll at a university that, for whatever reason, is failing to hold onto the vast majority its incoming freshmen. But this is neither a theoretical necessity nor, as it turns out, an empirical fact. If a university has an extremely low retention rate, one possibility is that it is alienating the students who don’t come back (by being incompetent, expensive, inhospitable, or otherwise deficient). But that is not the only possibility. Suppose that a university’s target-customer is somebody who desperately wants a college degree but, in terms of finances or intellect, is just on the cusp on of being able to complete a college degree. It may well that for every hundred such people who enroll, only four are able to make it to the second year. When compared to Harvard, with its 98% retention rate, such a university might seem to be doing badly. But from a business-viewpoint, a 1/25 batting average isn’t necessarily bad: many businesses operate on the assumption that most people are just ‘window-shopping.’ Also, the students who don’t come back are not exactly window-shopping, since they are paying handsomely for the time that they are there. In fact, since most of them drop out before completing the first year, they are paying not only for the time they are there as well as a great deal of time they are not there, with the university simply pocketing the difference. Plus, soon-to-be drop-outs tend to make rather minimal financial demands on universities: they tend not to go to office-hours, tend not to submit homework, and in general tend not to use university-resources. Further, if a university has a 4% retention rate, it will scale down its services and set its prices accordingly. It will not pay for faculty, facilities, and so on for the students who aren’t going to stay. Moreover, it will set its prices so that those who do stay are paying to offset any losses generated by those who didn’t. Again, there is nothing unusual about this from a business viewpoint. A successful angel investor may invest a small amount in 100 companies, knowing that 99 of will fail and also knowing that the one that succeeds will make up for the others. Many companies give out free samples, knowing that they will more than make for their losses as long as one person in a hundred eventually buys. Finally, universities with extremely low retention rates tend to have extremely high acceptance rates; and they also tend to have moderately high enrollment rates, since the students they accept have limited options. As a result, they do a lot of business, despite their low retention rates. Of course, when people that a given university has a 4% retention rate, they then to assume that it wants a higher retention rate. But, first of all, even if it wants a higher retention, it doesn’t necessarily need it. Second, it may not want a higher retention rate, since it may only be able to accommodate 4% those who enroll and would actually incur losses if retention rates increased. Third, there may not be anything it can do to increase its retention rates that wouldn’t alienate most of its customer base. Fourth, even if there is something that such a university can do to increase its retention rate, it is very unlikely to be able to change itself in such a way as to be able to do it. Let us now clarify this last point. Universities: Their Distinctive Business-model An OMC can turn on a dime. It can replace its entire labor force. It can start making new products. It can fire its CEO. Its CEO can fire every besides himself. An OMC has to be flexible, because it has to change its product to meet constantly changing consumer demands. But universities sell degrees—nothing else.4 In order for people to buy those degrees, the instruction they provide must on average exceed certain standards. When averaged over time and when averaged over all of the courses being taught, instruction must rise above a certain threshold. If the quality of instruction in every subject at a given university were always execrable, then that university might well eventually come to grief (though it would not necessarily do so: see below). But a university won’t necessarily come to grief if it always provides execrable instruction in some subjects or if it sometimes provides execrable instructions in all subjects. The instruction has to be just good enough, in certain respects in certain subjects at certain junctures, for there to be a perception on the part of enough people that it is worth having a degree from that institution.5 A corollary is that most of a university’s business depends on its providing instruction that is on average lackluster. Most students at a given university are just buying a degree; only a few are really working for that degree. And that degree has prestige, and is therefore worth buying, because of the efforts of those few. Consequently, the ideal situation for a university is when its degrees have prestige and as few people as possible are actually giving them that prestige. For so long as that degree has prestige, the way to maximize enrollment is to have as few students giving it prestige and as many as possible merely benefiting from that prestige. The more students are expected to be responsible for the prestige of that degree, the more they are likely to shy away from enrolling at that university in the first place. And the fewer students responsible for it giving it prestige---provided that somebody is giving it prestige—the larger the university’s customer-base. When people buy a lawn-mower or a pair of running shoes, what they are buying actually has to be good; there is no other reason to buy it. But a degree from Harvard doesn’t have to be backed by good instruction. Suppose that someone gets a degree from Harvard by cheating on all his papers and exams (without ever getting caught) and without learning anything. That degree is still an enormously powerful piece of social capital. And that person, even though he cheated his way through college, is far more likely than those without a Harvard degree (or equivalent, e.g. a Yale degree) to be accepted to business school, to get a job at an investment bank, etc. In light of these points, suppose that reasonably prestigious university X does the following. X eliminates tenure. It requires its faculty members to make sure that their students pass objective tests (tests that have objectively correct answers and that are not issued by those same faculty members). If a given faculty member fails to get enough of his students to pass, he is fired and replaced by someone who will hopefully do the job. What would happen to X? Instruction would certainly improve, and that might well bring in more of a certain kind of student. But most of X’s prospective students would be alienated by it. Most of X’s students want the prestige of a degree from X without having to go through four years of intellectual bootcamp. The changes just described would certainly benefit people who did end up attending X, and it might well make those people more employable than the X students who preceded them. But would those changes benefit X? No. X would lose most of its future students and many of its current students. Contrariwise, in its current condition, X, with its on average quite shoddy faculty and sup-par courses, is probably doing extremely well financially. Suppose that X took a middle-path. Suppose that, without turning itself into an intellectual bootcamp, X improved the quality of its instruction to the point by a solid margin, so that it was not longer just doing enough to give prestige to its degrees. If X did this, it would not lose as many as it would if it became an intellectual bootcamp, with uniformly good professors, but it would still lose a good chunk of those students, and it would be in a much worse situation, enrollment-wise, than it would be if it simply did the bare minimum. In general, colleges depend on their providing instruction that is on average just good enough and, consequently, in their on average demanding just enough of their students. If they turn themselves into genuinely efficiently educational entities, they will alienate most of their present and future customers. If they even try to make themselves more than just good enough to preserve the prestige-level of their degrees, they will alienate enough of their customer-base to appreciably worsen their financial situation. They optimal path for universities is to issue degrees that are prestigious and to provide instruction that is just good enough to be compatible with that objective. A corollary is that universities will often have rather low retention rates. If a university is doing just enough, it will inevitably sometimes slip below that threshold, with the result that students bail. How Useful Do Students Really Want Their Educations To Be? ‘But surely it would be better,’ it will be said, ‘if universities restructured themselves in such a way that, when their retentions got too low, they could make the necessary changes to themselves?’ Better for whom? If a given university changed itself in this way, that means it would be able to letter the axe fall whenever times got tough: nobody would be safe; any given professor or administrator could lose his job. Also, if an organization becomes such that it can fire people during lean times, then it can also fire people during good times: if a given university made itself able to right-size itself when retention was too low, then anyone could lose their job at any time, and some people would lose their jobs during good times. And nobody at a university wants that. 6 ‘But there is another, less risky way that universities could guarantee higher retention rates for themselves,’ it will be said. ‘If they simply made their graduates more employable—and managed to do so without making their undergraduate curricula alienatingly difficult--then everybody would be happy: universities would have high retention rates; professors and administrators would continue to have job-security; and students would have an assurance that their degrees would pay for themselves.’ As we’ve already pointed out, it wouldn’t be easy, or even possible, for universities to do this. But there is an even deeper issue that we haven’t yet discussed. People want to be employed, obviously, but how employable do they really want to be? Suppose that Smith is employed because he is employable---because he is useful, in other words. That means that he is imply only as long as he is useful. He might lose his job because of some slight change in technology or in company objectives. Before Wix came along, there were armies of people who made a decent living building websites. All but 1% of those people became useless when Wix and WordPress became available. They had to repurpose themselves, possibly completely retrain themselves. Also, if Smith is employed because he is useful, that means that, in order to keep his job, he actually has to be useful: he has to solve problems; he has to do whatever has to be done: he has to live by his wits. He has to figure out the left side of the building is sinking; he has to update the company’s computer system by the start of the next business day; he has to reconstruct his patient’s face; and so on. Is this what people want to be doing when they are 50, 60, 70? Nurses are useful; and a 60 year old registered nurse spends her day cleaning out infected wounds and mopping up biohazardous material. A life of usefulness is not easy. What most college students want, at least if their eventual careers are any indication, is to be relatively useless and employed. Explanation: If somebody who is useless has stable employment, their employment isn’t contingent on their being useful. Nobody expects redundant bureaucrats and middle managers to be useful; that is not why they are employed. And their jobs exceptionally safe precisely because those jobs are not about being useful. When jobs serve very well-defined practical functions, they are easily lost. If somebody’s living depends on his being able to produce great paintings or thought, or on his being able to hit a hole in one or to get acquittals in unwinnable cases, his career is over if he falls just slightly short once or twice. By contrast, if somebody’s career is about being a bureaucrat in some corporation or some government agency, and it isn’t quite clear what he does, he can fall short all he wants: his employment has nothing to do with his not falling short. If somebody is a mid-level lawyer who has an ill-defined role in some large corporate case, his job is relatively secure. If somebody is employed only as long as he gets acquittals, his job is not secure. Also, if one is employed only because he is useful, his earnings tend to wax and wane with his degree of usefulness. If somebody makes a living solving math problems, and somebody comes along who can do the job just slightly faster, the first person’s earnings are driven down. A corollary is that people who make their living by being useful tend not to have inflated salaries. By contrast, if somebody is a small part of an organization, with an ill-defined function within that organization, his earnings tend not to be hewed to his usefulness (or lack thereof), and he may consequently have an enormously inflated salary.7 Most college graduates tend to have well-paid jobs with poorly defined functions. They end up, to be blunt, being pencil pushers within corporations or government-agencies, and are extremely well-paid for doing little more than showing up and not making waves. They are not paid to be useful in the way that a plumber or doctor is useful. And that is what most college students want. They don’t want their future incomes to depend on their always being useful. They would like to know that when they are 55, they can have a comfortable income and a nice life-style without having to prove their usefulness every day. If they end up being plastic surgeons, they will have to prove their usefulness: nobody pays a plastic surgeon who botches the job. If they end up working as mid-level managers in corporate finance, they won’t have to prove their usefulness. So if colleges made their students more ‘employable’ by making them more ‘useful’, they would alienate most of those students. Political science majors know that their major does not make them useful; and that is part of the reason they do it. A ‘successful’ political science major tends to end up with a well-paying job that does not have a well-defined function and that is for that very reason relatively secure. A political science major does run a heavy risk of having no employment for some time after graduation. But the truth is he probably will end up with pretty much just the kind of white collar job that he expected to have---a good paying job that has no well-defined function or performance-benchmarks and is therefore secure. A computer science major is certainly better able to find work, and probably has a wider range of jobs to choose from; but those jobs have well-defined functions and performance-benchmarks and are correspondingly insecure. The Paradox of Macroeconomic Efficiency Many people assume that if most of the work-force consists of useless pencil pushers, that cannot last for long—that there is some kind of employment ‘bubble’ that will soon burst. Certainly, if a micro-economy—an economy of 100 people---consisted of people who were not pulling their own weight, it would not last long. In tiny self-contained villages thousands of years, people tended to have to be useful in some very well-defined way. But in a micro-economy, there is very little division of labor, and labor tends to be extremely inefficient, that being why nobody can ‘slack off.’ But in economies of scale, there is enormous division of labor, and only a small percent of the population actually has to produce. The more advanced an economy is, the greater the percentage of people in it who can be useless. In Cambodia under Pol Pot, there was 100% employment, because everybody had to be employed, and everybody had to be employed because production was so inefficient. In Britain in 1820, there very few useless jobs, but the jobs that people had tended to be difficult and unpleasant. In the United States in 2019, most jobs are useless. They are useless because they can be useless, because the small part of the population that is productive is so productive that the rest doesn’t have to be. So yes, if the percentage of the population that was actually useful dropped too close to zero, then the economy would fall apart. But that hasn’t happened yet and there is no reason to think that it will happen any time soon. And until it does happen, it is not irrational for people to do easy majors and bide their time after college until they land a well-paid sinecure. Contrariwise, if colleges got rid of easy majors and insisted on producing only useful undergraduates, they would alienate those students. But suppose that someone majors in political science at Macon State and finds himself unable to get a job after graduation. Such people often get vocational certifications; they become certified emergency medical technicians, accountants, or computer-technicians. This is extremely common. When this happens, does it mean that the person in question was wrong to get a degree in political science (or religious studies…) at Macon College (or VCU…)? It obviously means that it didn’t pan out for them, but it was still very likely a risk worth taking. Had it worked out, they would have had an easy, stable $75,000/year job. Given that it didn’t work out, they have some student debt, but nothing irreparable. Plus, many people enjoy their time in college, however little that time contributed to their being able to make a living. In any case, although majoring in a non-practical subject at a low-tier (or even a high-tier) school may not immediately have a good outcome, it is often a risk that it is rational to take. When in Doubt, Drop Out: Dispelling the Myth that Only Losers Drop Out Mention is often made of the ‘tragedy’ of high college dropout rates. But is this ‘tragedy’ really a tragedy? No. To be sure, it certainly could be a mistake for someone to drop out. It I indeed a mistake for someone to drop out if he is just one term-paper away from a degree that will open vast professional vistas. But when people drop out, it is usually for good reasons, and it isn’t a tragedy for anyone. Harvard has a drop-out rate of close to zero. Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) has a 60% drop-out rate. Sul Rock State has a 95% drop-out rate. Explanation: A Harvard degree is worth the trouble 99% of the time, a VCU degree is worth the trouble 30% of the time, and a Sul Rock State degree is worth the trouble 5% of the time. It isn’t successful engineering majors who drop-out of VCU; nor is it successful nursing majors. It is people who are barely getting by in political science or criminal justice. Much the same is true of Sul Rock State. When people drop out, it is usually (not always) because it isn’t worth it for them to stay. When people drop out from such institutions, it may be to pounce on a job-opportunity that won’t last and is better than what will be available to them when they graduate. And even if they don’t have definite plans as to what they will do after they drop out, they generally do not become indigent. They may become police officers or they may go to trade school. When people drop out, it is usually because they believe that they stand to lose more by staying in school than by dropping out, and in most cases they are right. Also, dropping out is often part of a hedging strategy. People who drop out of college can usually go back. And when people drop out, it is often to ‘test the waters’: they are not sure if their current college is worth the trouble; so, they drop out to see whether they can do without a degree. If they find that they degree is necessary, they are likely to return to college. It is not possible to become an investment banker or surgeon without a college degree. But the people who drop out of college are usually not destined for such positions. If they finish out their degrees in religious studies or political science from VCU or Sul Rock State, they may become probation officers, Community College Administrators, or mid-level managers at a local firm. When they drop out, they may become plumbers, electricians, computer-technicians, or police officers. And they may find the latter careers more fulfilling than the former; and the latter may be also be as lucrative as the former. So in most cases, dropping out is not a tragedy for the drop-out. Nor is it a tragedy for the institution that was dropped out of. If a university has a drop-out rate of 70%, it adjusts its service and prices accordingly. In any case, there has not a been a single case in the United States of a college shutting down due to high drop-out rates. Knowledge-management: Introductory Remarks In recent years a new discipline has emerged called Knowledge Management (KM); and for reasons that will become clear, KM is believed to have the potential to help institutions become more efficient. It might therefore be surmised that KM could help colleges increase low retention-rates, the idea being that low retentions are a function of inefficiencies on the part of colleges. In the second part of this work that KM certainly has the ability to help construct alternatives to existing colleges. But when it comes to improving retention-rates at existing colleges, there is nothing for KM to do. First of all, what is KM? In order for institutions to capitalize on opportunities, they must be organized in such a way as to optimize the flow of relevant information between their members. If there are people in the Acme Bridge-building Company who know how to build bridges but don’t know where bridges are needed, and there are Acme-employees who know where bridges are needed but not how to build them, Acme will succeed if its employees can share their knowledge and will fail otherwise. KM explains how Acme must be organized to maximize the likelihood of such exchanges. In general, KM explains how institutions must be organized if knowledge-exchanges that must occur are to occur. KM can help when poor internal communications are preventing an institution from accomplishing what it wants to accomplish. KM cannot help when poor internal communications are not the issue or, of course, when there simply is no issue. Therefore, KM cannot help universities, since there is not much of an issue where they are concerned and since, so far as there is one, poor internal communications are not responsible for it. Why Knowledge-management Cannot be of Assistance to Universities Unlike OMC’s, universities actually depend on poor internal communications. University departments are highly isolated from and fiercely independent of one another. On the rare occasions when different departments cooperate, they do so only at specific junctures, in very circumscribed ways, after months or years of meetings, and then only with heavy reservations. By contrast, an OMC would simply fail if its different departments were comparably isolated. Explanation: OMC’s are about providing optimal products and services, whereas universities are about maintaining prestige, and prestige is harder to maintain when information is allowed to flow than then when it is sequestered. In any university, there are innumerable occasions when students would be well-served by a class that was taught jointly by the philosophy and psychology departments, or by the philosophy and economics departments, or by the economics and African studies departments, and so on. But such joint ventures almost never happen. Within their own departments, professors have virtually uncontested authority, and they have a kind cult status. They cannot be called out, because each student within that department depends on their good graces. But if a philosophy professor teamed up with an economics professor, that philosophy professor could (and probably would) be called out economics students who were not under his thumb, and the economics professor might be called out by philosophy students who were not under his thumb. Consequently, were departments not mutually isolated and were they in the habit of cooperating with one another whenever students stood to benefit, they would have to step up their game considerably to survive the consequent scrutiny. A professor’s survival, as it were, would be that much less prestige-based and that much more competence-based. And the kind of professor would do well in this kind of environment is the kind of professor would demand a lot of his students. Some students do like this kind of professor; most do not. And most of practically any given university’s students would bolt if that university’s professors were replaced with the professors of the kind who were always ready to take on new subjects and fresh challenges. Contrariwise, the kinds of professors who do well in actual universities, where they never have to teach students who are not strictly under their thumb and where they teach the same material year in and year out, demand relatively little of students. The kind of professor who is always looking for a new challenge is a high-energy professor: he demands a lot of himself and will tend to demand a lot of his students. The kind of professor who has his niche is happy to stay there does not demand much of himself or (apart from a certain degree of adulation in some cases) of his students. Students of a certain kind are drawn to professors of the first kind; but most of a university’s business come from students who are more comfortable with professors of the second kind. Consequently, universities thrive on a low degree of communication between departments and therefore, as it were, on a certain lack of knowledge-management. Key Points Universities are extremely reluctant to change. Universities don’t have to change. Universities would alienate their customers as well as most of their own employees if they did change, especially if those changes involved making them better at teaching their students and at making them employable. Universities are doing well financially and otherwise, despite low retention- and graduation-rates. The fact that many universities have lower retention- and graduation-rates than they would like does not represent much of a business opportunity for anyone. Nor does it represent an opportunity to do any real good, since making universities better would lower their retention- and graduation-rates: making them better at teaching and at producing employable graduates would be the kiss of death for them. Nor does it represent an opportunity to try out principles of knowledge-management, since universities are positively dependent on poor internal communications and therefore on systemically rooted failures of knowledge-management. Conclusion of Part 1: How to Maximize Revenue by Optimizing Education Now for some corollaries of these points. First, if one’s desire is to have a successful business venture, they way to do it is not to try to improve the retention- and graduation-rates of existing universities. Second, and more significantly, if one’s objective is to improve education—to make it faster, cheaper, better, and more useful---the way to do it is not to try to ‘fix’ existing universities: they are happy just the way are and are both unwilling and unable to be fixed. In fact, the idea that one could march into a university and fix it, and possibly even be paid to do so, is the very definition of absurdity. Universities are they are, and that’s the end of it. Apart from a few religions, there are no institutions that are as unwilling to change and as resistant to being tinkered with as universities. Universities do change, but slowly and only to their own terms, which will make extremely little sense to people with a bottom-line mentality. Finally, and most significantly, if one wants to improve education and to make money doing so, there is at the current an enormous opportunity. Right now is the perfect time to make education affordable, fast, effective, and also (for the owner of the educational service in question) extremely lucrative. In the second part of the present work, it will be described exactly how to do this, and it will made clear how the principles of knowledge management can integral to doing so. The Economics of Higher Education in the 21st Century Part II Introduction to Part II In this part of the book, we will design a university that provides fast, reliable, and affordable service. For reasons that will be made clear, this university will be online. This will university will be distinctive in a number of other ways, all of which will be stated explicitly. We will refer to this hypothetical university as DMO (short for ‘digitize, mechanize, optimize’, the idea being that digitization and mechanization will help to optimize this institution). DMO’s structure is to a large extent rooted in principles of knowledge-management (KM). So we will begin by saying what KM and by stating the principles of KM that are relevant to our project. What is Knowledge-management (KM)? Any given person within any given institution needs to have information in order to do his job properly. KM is the discipline is that attempts to say how an institution must be organized if the people in it are to have the highest possible chance of having the information that they need to do their job. Here is an illustration. Smith, Jones and Brown are the only members of a three-member firm. Smith is having lunch with Green, a billionaire oil tycoon and potential client, and Green says that he desperately needs somebody who is an expert in petroleum engineering. As it happens, Jones is the world’s greatest petroleum engineer, but Smith doesn’t know this and therefore tells Green that he will ‘try to find a petroleum engineer’ for him. Disappointed with this lackluster answer, Green doesn’t retain the services of Smith’s firm and they lose a billion-dollar account. This situation is the result of poor knowledge-management. The talent was there, and so was the demand; but the company didn’t know that it was able to service that demand. What are some solutions? Smith-Jones-Brown (SJB) could have weekly board meetings. SJB could institute policies that require a given member to advise the others of any meetings with possible clients. SJB might make their policy to send daily memos to one another. Being an academic discipline, KM is more interested in producing true generalizations than it is solving particular problems had by specific organizations. But those generalizations are legitimate if, and only if, they can be used to solve such problems, and there is also no way to identify those generalizations except by dealing with many specific cases. An Actual Company that Could Benefit from KM The example just given was obviously artificial. Here is an actual example of a case where KM is needed to solve a problem. There is a reasonably prominent online tutoring agency by the name of OneClass (https://oneclass.com/). It hires reasonably talented people and offers them what appear to be high rates of pay (e.g. $45 to help with assignment that ordinarily should take around one hour to complete). But tutors find for one hour that they spend with a student, they have to spend around five justifying their answers to supervisors who can and will withhold pay indefinitely, usually under the pretext of ensuring that the tutor complies with OneClass’s rather extensive and vaguely defined procedures. As a result, instructors of merit don’t stay for long, and students are left with shoddy and (thanks to all of the bureaucratic bloat) expensive service. As a result, clients are leaving OneClass or simply avoiding it, and revenues are falling. Instructors cannot communicate directly with upper-management; only middle-management can do that. But the instructors are the ones who both know what the problems are and have an incentive to make upper management aware of them; so that information is not relayed to the right people, and the company is hemorrhaging money. KM is supposed to tell us whether this problem can be solved and, if so, how to solve it. KM is also supposed to tell us how to avoid having problems like this in the first place. Let us now discuss each of these points. Who Exactly Sounds the KM-alarm? A KM-expert cannot be of service to OneClass unless OneClass asks for his help. For argument’s sake, let us suppose that this happens. A competent KM-expert would probably suggest downsizing middle-management, which would free up money, making it possible to charge students less and hire better tutors. He would also suggest eliminating bureaucratic hurdles that the instructors have to jump through that waste their time and drive them away from the company. Of course, there may not be any single person at a given company who can decide to enlist the help of a KM-expert, let alone implement the changes that a KM-expert would suggest making. And if the necessary executive power is shared by a number of different people, as is often the case, they may not agree to hire a KM-expert; and if they do hire one, they may not agree as to whether to implement his recommendations. After all, a KM-expert might recommend changing the structure of the company in a way that deprives many of these decision-makers of their power. He may even recommend firing many of them. They will know this and not hire him. And if a given self-described KM-expert can be trusted not to recommend downsizing or otherwise changing management-structure, then he probably isn’t very good at what he does, since knowledge-management within an organization cannot be appreciably improved without changing the very structure of that organization. KM as Preventative Measure This brings us to the second scenario. Suppose that somebody wants to start an online tutoring service that avoids the problems that OneClass has. Such a person might conceivably hire a KM-expert (or, more likely, use his own KM-expertise) to design his company in such a way that those problems don’t arise. In practice, this is what usually happens. Once a company already exists, especially if it is large, there may not be any way to change that company without the consent of the very people within that company who are causing the problems. If the ACME Corporation is run by a board of four equally powerful people, two of whom are ruining the company and two of whom are not, they are unlikely to agree to implement the changes suggest by a competent party who is brought in from the outside, assuming that they can even agree to enlist such a person’s help in the first place. In general, KM problems are hard to fix but easy to avoid, and they are avoided by designing companies properly. The mistake made by the people who designed OneClass was to focus more on policing instructors than one hiring instructors who don’t need to be policed. KM in Relation to Organizations that Sell Results Our objective is to design a superior educational service. In this section, we will state some principles of KM, along with principles of economics and of simple common sense, that are relevant to that objective. Knowledge-management is possible when the organization in question has definite objectives, and when it does not have definite objectives, knowledge-management is as difficult as those objectives are vague. If a company’s objective is to help people to pass some assessment test, then it tends to be clear whether a given piece of information is worth communicating to other company members. If a company's objective is to ‘improve wellness' or ‘broaden minds,' then it tends not to be clear whether a given piece of information is worth relaying. When an organization is in the business of providing results, objectives are well-defined, with correspondingly positive consequences for knowledge-management within that organization. When an organization provides services, objectives tend to be vaguely defined, with correspondingly negative consequences for knowledge-management within that organization. When an organization sells results, prices tend to drop, and when it sells services, they tend to rise. The first computers were expensive. But once the first one was built, it was clear what had to be done and it was only a matter of time before the process was streamlined, the result being computers that are thousands of times more powerful than the first ones and thousands of times less expensive. By contrast, when you a hire law firm to settle a contract dispute, you are not paying for results, since results cannot be guaranteed in such a situation, and you are therefore paying for services. Since the law firm therefore profits by selling services, it has every incentive to draw out the process as much as possible, resulting in soaring costs for you. In general, when results are sold, there is no money in services, and services have to be streamlined; and when services are sold, there is no money in results, and services have to be inflated. KM in Relation to Organizations that Sell Services When you hire somebody to build a pool for you, there is a well-defined objective, and that is what you are paying for. Services are priced into the end-result, but you are paying for the end result, not the services: if no pool is built, you are likely to sue the contractor and he will end up paying you, not the other way around. But when services, as opposed to results, are provided, many different results are ipso facto possible: in a legal dispute, there are innumerably many possible results intermediate between complete success and complete failure. A criminal case can result in no time served and twenty years’ probation; five years served and three years of community service; two years served and $5,000,000 in fines; and so on. Vague benchmarks lead to vague communications, and knowledge-management is only as good as benchmarks are clearly defined. But this is not necessarily a problem for providers of services. Inefficiency and poor internal communications are lucrative when the client is paying for services, and they are expensive only when he is paying for results. If a lawyer is billing by the hour, then he has everything to gain and nothing to lose if he gets stuck in traffic or his secretary misplaces a file. It is only when results are being paid for that the costs of such inefficiencies cannot be passed onto the client. If a plumber says he’ll fix a pipe for $100, and it turns out to take him 10 hours to do the job, he can only charge $100, and he is likely to be lowballed by the competition if he hedges by quoting a higher price. Results-providers compete on efficiency, and their prices tend to be bid down. Service-providers compete on inefficiency, and their prices tend to be bid up. A lawyer cannot tell a client what he will get for him. He can only tell him what he will do for him. He cannot promise an acquittal. But he can promise to hire around-the-clock private detective; he can promise to subpoena 100 different witnesses; he can promise to hire a voice-expert; and so on. So if one lawyer tries to lowball another, it will tend to be not offering some of these services, which obviously diminishes the client’s faith in him. A better strategy is for him to offer more services than the first: he’ll get a team of private detectives, he’ll personally fly to Washington to speak with the attorney general, and so on. In general, whereas results-markets are inherently efficient, service-markets are inherently inefficient. Service-organizations Depend on Poor KM When people within a given organization have an incentive to block communications within it, information tends to be blocked, and people within service organizations tend to have such incentives. Such organizations make money by multiplying and drawing out services. Therefore, the management profits from the inefficiencies that good communication eliminates, and people within organization are paid to create such inefficiencies. Such an organization profits by having a middle-manager who withholds information from underlings in order to force tasks to be repeated and in order to justify various quality-controls. It is only to the extent that an organization profits from good internal communications that internal communications are good. KM Impossible Unless Employment and Pay are Performance-dependent When poor performance doesn’t lead to loss of employment, performance tends to be poor, and performance tends to be good when poor performance does lead to loss of employment. A corollary is that internal communications tend to be bad when employment is guaranteed and good when it isn’t. When salaries depend on performance, performance tends to be good, and it tends to be bad when salaries do not depend on performance. A corollary is that internal communications tend to be good when salaries are performance-dependent and bad when they aren’t. No KM without Financial Transparency It is hard to know who is pulling their weight in an organization, or exactly how much weight they are pulling, unless clients hire them directly. Imagine the following. Firm 1 and Firm 2 are both engineering firms, but there is an important difference between them. When clients go to Firm 1, they cannot hire engineers directly: they have to hire Firm 1 as a whole, and Firm 1 then assigns an engineer to them. But when clients go to Firm 2, they hire engineers directly. The engineers who are hired then give a percentage of their earnings to Firm 2, in exchange for equipment, permits, marketing, credibility, and other important resources. It’s going to be very for Firm 1 to know who they should promote and who they should hire. They can rely on reviews from clients, but those do very little in the way of making it clear how much a given worker is really doing. (A gruff engineer who single-handedly builds a skyscraper might get middling reviews, while an affable engineer who can barely build a birdhouse gets stellar ones.) And if engineers in Firm 2 can set their own prices, it will even more clear who is doing how much. Also, given that clients cannot hire engineers directly from Firm 1, its engineers have to take the work that is given to them. That means that somebody else (a middle manager) will decide whether to award a given project to a given engineer. Projects will go the wrong people, and the talent will be misdeployed and underdeployed. Also, given that the customer-interface will be management, and not the talent itself, the latter will always be laboring under glass ceiling, making it hard for them to develop larger projects and to maximize their contributions to the firm. Organization-internal communications are worthless unless they are based on solid information as to how the organization in question can engage the market. There is no better way for an organization to have such information than for its employees to be able to offer their services directly to clients. This isn’t always possible. No single engineer in an aircraft company is going to be able to service clients. But it is possible where organizations that provide instruction are concerned, for reasons that will soon be discussed. Expense-padding in Relation to KM When a business is legitimate, it does not inflate costs. Microsoft has an enormous market-share because it gives people what they are paying for at a low cost, and it would lose its market-share were it to pad expenses or otherwise gouge its customers. When a business can provide what it says it provides, it stands to make more money by keeping quality high and costs low than by keeping costs high and quality low. Businesses are forced to pad and gouge when it isn’t by providing the service that they say they are providing that they make their money. For example, most life-coaches don’t do much of anything. Since they don’t provide a product, there is no way for them to provide that product more efficiently. For them the best way to make money is to make what they are offering seem important while being vague about it. Clients are lured in with impressive but vague claims. Once they are there, some actual services are dribbled out and mixed in with various unnecessary but expensive services. A business of this kind thrives on inefficiency. It cannot give the customer what he is paying for all at once, since the customer would then know how little he was really getting. Legitimate services have to be dragged out and interspersed with extraneous ones. A business of this kind is concerned with managing expectations. It is not concerned with increasing its own efficiency: in fact, it is concerned with decreasing it. If a business of this kind consists of a handful of people, they may all be consciously in on this fraud. It is certainly possible for Smith, Jones, and Brown to explicitly agree with each other that they are going to defraud clients. But if such a business is at all large, most of its employees will have to at least partially accept the company’s own propaganda: otherwise, it will have trouble recruiting people and trouble keeping them motivated once they are there. Such a company’s internal communications therefore tend to be inefficient, since it isn’t clear what the company does or therefore what there is to say about how it could it do it better. A Corollary: Education Must be Digitized Whenever Possible A corollary is that when education can be digitized, it must be digitized. Of course, not every kind of instruction can be digitized, at least not at present. It is very difficult to teach somebody how to play the piano or perform surgery over the internet. But usually it can be digitized; and should be whenever possible, since doing so saves time and money and makes it easy for purchase custom-made education from the best instructors at the lowest possible price. If a university chooses not to digitize educational services that can be digitized, that is because it isn’t primarily by providing instruction that it makes its money. DMO: A New and Better Kind of University Thanks to the points thus far made, we are now in a position to draw up a blueprint for a new and better kind of institution of higher education. As previously stated, we will refer to this hypothetical institution as DMO. The most important fact about DMO is that students pay for results, not services. Therefore, a degree from DMO must be proof of competence. DMO does not sell prestige; it sells competence. DMO is not meant to meant to replace existing brick-and-mortar institutions. DMO is meant to provide maximally efficient and effective instruction in every area that can be taught digitally, with several heavy qualifications. The main qualification is that a degree from DMO is actual proof of competence. It follows that DMO will not teach people how to be pilots, surgeons or plumber. It also follows that DMO will not provide accreditations in areas, such as history or religious studies, where a degree cannot possibly constitute proof of competence. Another second qualification is that what DMO offers in the way of instruction covaries in real time with what the market needs people to know. Third, DMO will offer instruction (and accreditation) in a dramatically wider range of subjects than any existing (or possible) brick and mortar institutions. (This qualification is to some extent a corollary of the second.) Fourth, DMO will offer many different levels of accreditation in practically any given of the areas in which it provides instruction. DMO will offer bachelor’s, master’s and doctoral degrees; but it will offer many other accreditations. Fifth, nobody who graduates from DMO is useless. DMO-graduates may want to get additional degrees, but they won’t have to: they will already be employable. Sixth, DMO’s objective is to produce people who are competent. It is not to exclude incompetent people so that it can then take undeserved credit for the merits of its graduates. Consequently, DMO will not exclude people. DMO will regard unintelligent people who want a DMO-education as being in the same category as sick people who go to a hospital: they are there to improve themselves and will thus receive service. All Accreditations Examination-based At DMO, instructors do not issue grades. There are no grades. There are accreditations. Accreditations are attained by taking examinations. These examinations are graded anonymously (by computer, whenever possible). They are designed and administered by independent third parties. The questions on these examinations have determinate answers. There will be little or no disagreement among experts how a given question is to be answered. The instructors have access to past accreditations exams. (In fact, DMO will make such exams available to all students, and possibly to the general public, free of charge.) But they do not have access to forthcoming exams. One consequence of this arrangement is that there are many subjects (e.g. history and religious studies) that DMO simply will not teach. Another consequence is that the instructors at DMO are indeed instructors, not gate-keepers. It does not matter whether you instructor likes you or what he thinks of your work. He does not pass you or fail you. You pass if you pass the accreditation exam and fail if you fail that exam. Your instructor’s one job is to get you to pass that exam. These points will be developed below. How DMO Turns Non-STEM Students into STEM Students DMO has two lines in the sand. First, whenever a degree is earned, it is definite proof of merit. Second, it is always completely clear (to everyone, including employers), what kind of merit a given degree is proof of. If somebody has an accreditation in discrete mathematics from DMO, then an employer who needs a discrete math specialist can hire that person with complete confidence that he will be competent. This means that when it comes to the kinds of people who are likely to major in the humanities and social sciences, DMO has its work cut out for itself. Its primary solution will be to offer lite science degrees: lite-physics, lite-math; math for computer scientists; lite biology. In this way, DMO gets people out of the doldrums of the liberal arts and into STEM. In addition to being inherently legitimate, this objective is also highly attainable. Many people in the humanities, especially philosophy, are actually highly intelligent. But (for that reason, arguably) they find details rather annoying. Anyone who has studied physics knows that it’s largely about details; there are some ‘big ideas’, but it is mainly about grinding out solutions, oftentimes using rather thorny mathematics. The same is true of all of the sciences. Yes—there are ‘big ideas.’ But most of them are about grinding out facts/theorems. Because people in the humanities tend to be ‘big idea’ people, they resent doing the labor involved in STEM subjects. At the same time, they like and are adept at the ‘big ideas’ part of those disciplines. College majors being what they are, big idea people tend to have little choice but to flee from STEM, including economics, into the likes of poly sci, history, etc. The result is that these people, despite their considerable intellectual gifts, end up being completely useless: no matter how advanced you are in political science, you are not employable (except in a bureaucratic way). Contrariwise, somebody whose college career consists in his learning the big ideas of science, along with just enough applications to nail down understanding, is extremely useful. For this reason, DMO will offer a major in ‘general studies in the sciences.’ There will be variants of this degree, including general studies in the applied sciences, general studies in the biological sciences, general studies in information sciences, general studies in health sciences, and the like. Emphasis on Instruction as Opposed to Selection Existing universities are discriminatory; they do not all service all comers. OMC’s (open-market companies) are not like this. Nike doesn’t ‘exclude’ certain customers; nor does Amazon or Microsoft. Why this difference? Because OMC’s sell products, whereas universities sell prestige. If universities really sold instruction—in other words, if they made their money by seeing to it that people left them more competent than they came to them---they would want as many customers as possible. If they were in the business of making people smarter, they would want as many people as possible paying them to make them smarter. But universities are very selective who they choose to service, and the reason is that their product is weak: they are simply not that good at instructing people. (They are reasonably good at taking people who are already gifted and then pointing them in the right direction.) If I invent a pill that makes people smarter, and I want to make money by selling that pill, I will obviously want to sell to as many people as possible. I won’t want to exclude anybody. In fact, the less desirable (the less intelligent) the customer, the better. By contrast, if invented a pill that doesn’t make people smarter, or does so only under certain circumstances, I may want to have a different business model: I may want to vet customers. DMO has the first business model. Other universities have the second. More Degree-levels at DMO An A in a given class at a given university tends not to mean anything. And even in cases where an A definitely means something, its exact meaning is deeply unclear. True—an A in engineering 101 means something. But it means one thing at M.I.T. and something quite different at Virginia Commonwealth University. Because individual classes at universities have either no significances or no determinate significances, accreditations can be only awarded to people who have taken hulkingly large pluralities of classes. This is a hedging strategy. The idea is Smith must have at least at least some merit if he passes a hundred classes, even though many of those of them had no meaning and few if any had determinate meanings. The less guarantee there is that a given class has merit, the larger the number of classes a student must pass in order to be awarded a degree that is taken as proof of merit. This limits the number of levels of degrees that a university can issue. If someone takes six classes a given university, that doesn’t necessarily mean anything at all; and even if it does mean something, it isn’t clear exactly what it means, since it isn’t clear what the student had to do to pass them. (He may have had to have passed some test or other in logic, but it is not clear what was on that test—or even if there was one. The situation will vary from school to school and, within a given school, from professor to professor.) But if individual courses had guaranteed meanings, and if it was always determinate what those meanings were, then passing so much as a single class would be definite proof of a definite kind of merit. In that case, a ‘two-year’ degree---in other words, a degree awarded for two-years’ worth of course-work---would have an enormous amount of meaning. In fact, a one year-degree would have meaning. Even a three-month degree---of the right kind—would have meaning. In general, the greater the guarantee that a given course has meaning, and the greater the degree of specificity as to what meaning is, the fewer courses a student will have to take in order for that student to be recognized as having merit. At DMO, there is no such thing as a grade that is not definitive proof of a well-defined kind of merit. For this reason, a student at DMO can prove himself to have a high degree of a very definite kind of merit by passing a relatively small number of classes. For this reason, DMO will, with credibility, be able to issue many different levels of degrees. (In fact, any given course at DMO will itself be a mini-degree, simply because successful completion of that class constitutes definite proof of a definite kind of merit.) This means that students can earn credible degrees from DMO in a fraction of the time, and with a fraction of the expense, that would be involved in getting a degree from another institution. It also means that students would have many options intermediate between getting degree at all and spending four to eight years, and wracking up debt, getting a degree that may have little inherent or practical significance. Instructors Never to Function as Gatekeepers DMO always offers students the ability to ‘test out.’ In other words, a student can get a given accreditation just by passing the examination in question: no time need be spent ‘in class.’ This is necessary. As long as students have the option of testing out, it is guaranteed that students only pay instructors for actual instruction. When it isn’t possible to test out, instructors tend to function as gatekeepers: they are not there to instruct, but rather to open the gates, as they see fit. If instructors are paid to be gatekeepers, there is no guarantee that they are good instructors. Payments to Go Straight from Student to Instructor At DMO, a hires a given instructor only if he believes that instructor to be able to help some accreditation exam that the professor himself does not grade. This means that students will not want to work with instructors who are failures at getting students to pass these exams and will want to work instructors who can get them to pass. It also means that students will be willing to pay more for instructors who are likely to get them to pass than for those who unlikely to do so. This means that students and instructors must be able to negotiate prices directly. If the student pays DMO, and DMO then supplies the student with an instructor, the student is no longer able to choose competent instructors and to not choose incompetent ones. This means that incompetent instructors will not pay the price for their incompetence and competent ones will not be rewarded for their competence. This in turn means that instruction will be poor. Therefore, students must negotiate prices directly with instructors, and payments must go straight to the instructor. The instructor will give a percentage of his earnings to DMO in exchange for use of the platform, business volume, credibility, instructional materials, and the like. An immediate corollary is that there is no permanent employment at DMO, let alone tenure, only contract-work. Another corollary is that instructor-revenue is determined entirely by instructor-competence. The Inverted Payment Pyramid At a conventional university, the money flows down. Students pay the university; the university pays instructors. The result: expensive and bad education. At DMO, the money flows up. Instructors are directly sought by students based on their performance-statistics, with instructors keeping most of what the student pays and the rest, probably around 20%, going to defray overhead costs. This will make DMO lean and functional. Because the student knows where his money is going, there is not very much DMO can do to over-charge or mis-charge. Also, since management has to work within the limits set by that 20%, bureaucrat will be impossible, and management will have strong incentives to hire and retain instructors who are able to service large market-sectors. 25 Desiderata that DMO Must Satisfy Let us now state all of these points as explicitly concisely as possible. Any given degree issued by DMO will be definite proof of a definite kind of merit; and to do this, as well as satisfy the objectives that we have seen to be involved therein, DMO satisfy the following twenty-five desiderata: 1. DMO must be accredited. Students must be able to receive recognized degrees. 2. DMO must be online. 3. Instruction must be largely (though not entirely) individualized. 4. There must be clear, universally recognize performance-benchmarks for students in all academic areas. 5. There must be similar benchmarks for instructors (this is a corollary of the last point). 6. Students hire instructors directly. 7. Instructor-rates are determined by the student and the instructor, not by DMO. The instructor gives a cut of his earnings to DMO, in exchange for DMO’s resources (these being the platform, educational resources, marketing, credibility, large business volume, and the like). 8. Instructor-statistics are always available to prospective students. These statistics include number of accreditation-tests pasts by students and the exact identifies of such tests. Instructor-pay is therefore based on volume of work and satisfaction of such benchmarks. 9. Satisfaction of such benchmarks is never to be decided by the professors. Consequently, there are no ‘grades’ per se, only accreditation exams. A corollary is that assignments, including papers, are always simply exercises; they do not result in grades or accreditations. Those assignments can and will be responded to (read and commented on) by such people, but those responses will not constitute grades or formal actions of any kind, their sole purpose being to illuminate. 10. The questions on these accreditation exams admit of clear, unambiguous and universally recognizable answers. A corollary is questions relating to course-specific topics will not occur on these tests. 11. Instructors are minimally policed. They can teach what they want, how they want. 12. Instructors are encouraged to take performance-tests of their own (similar to and sometimes identical with those taken by their own students) and to publicly display their scores on these. Initially, instructors will inevitably have the usual credentials (doctorates from brick-and-mortar institutions, along with publications). And they are allowed to showcase these, but with time these will become increasingly less important. 13. There is no tenure. 14. Termination is reserved for two kinds of circumstances: failure to take on students that are making themselves available at agreed-upon rates and gross misconduct (invoicing non-existent sessions, lying to students about qualifications, and the like). 15. There must be a wider variety of disciplines and of degrees than in current institutions of higher learning. 16. The student’s situation should not be binary—it should not be either ‘degree’ or ‘no degree.’ There should be a score that corresponds to objective and verifiable accomplishments on the student’s part, a degree being issued only when that score reaches a predetermined target. 17. Disciplines that have no practical value should either be jettisoned or modified so to have practical value. (Realistically, they will usually be replaced with generalized versions of practical disciplines.) 18. Disciplines that do not admit of objective assessments should either be jettisoned or modified so to admit of such assessments. 19. Universally applicable tests of intelligence and critical reasoning should be administered, to prove that the student is not only acquiring subject-specific knowledge but is also becoming a better thinker. These will be administered and graded free of charge. The student does not have to take them, but if he does take them and his performance exceeds a certain threshold, they count as credentials. There will be instructors who specialize in helping students with these tests. 20. DMO will always have past copies of these tests, and of all other accreditation-exams, but DMO instructors will not create them. DMO will contract with outside parties to generate the relevant tests, which will not be revealed to DMO instructors until after they have been taken. 21. The use of student evaluations should be minimized or eliminated. Student input should concern professionalism of instructor. The instructor’s merit should be determined by student-performance, not by opinion or sentiment. 22. Students should be able to switch between instructors easily, so as to prevent their education from being jammed up by personal conflicts with instructors 23. The contents of curricula should be publicly accessible, so that students can start working on them prior to enrolling in DMO. This is to ensure that instructors actually instruct, instead of just being gate-keepers. 24. Hirings are to be made exclusively on proven or probable success helping students pass accreditation exams. Therefore, publications are irrelevant to hiring decision, and so are letters of reference. 25. Mini-majors should be offered: miniature degrees in economics, physics, and so on. Conclusion of Part 2 Existing universities are failing in many respects. Most of the degrees they issue have literally no objective significance and utterly fail to provide definitive proof of merit. Moreover, universities are expensive and slow. Finally, they are discriminatory, in that they prevent the very people who need their services from receiving them. They do this in two ways. First, they turn people away who want to study at them. (Though non-ideal, this is forgivable, given their limited resources of space and manpower.) Second (and far less forgivably), they turn their own students away from courses of study that would actually benefit them: they offer very few practical courses of study, and they load those courses of study with so many stumbling blocks that people who could be creditable practitioners of the corresponding fields end up being exiled into useless, soft majors. Theoretically, universities are supposed to instruct; but they don’t instruct, so much as they wall out people who need instruction, choosing to open the gates only to people who can self-teach their way through their majors. There is little hope of reforming unviersities. They don’t want to be reformed, and they don’t stand to gain by being reformed. (See Part 1, as well the Conclusion of the Present Work.) Nor are they asking to be reformed. But this doesn’t matter, since there is no need to reform them. In the present work, we put forth a detailed plan for a university (DMO) that will do what existing universities are failing to do, and nothing is preventing anybody from implementing that plan. The essence of DMO is that it is results-based, not service-based. DMO-instructors are instructors, not gatekeepers. They are paid directly by students to help those students pass independently administered accreditation exams, successful completion of which is always definitive proof of a well-defined as well as useful form of competence. Consequently, instructor-earnings depend only the quality and volume of their work. Because each successfully completed examination has universally recognizable and well-defined significance, a DMO-student need only a small number of courses to provide definitive proof that he has a given skill or is employable in a given respect. It also allows DMO to offer a much wider range of courses of study than its conventional brick-and-mortar counterparts, giving it the ability to absorb people into STEM majors who at conventional universities would be exiled to the limbo of the liberal arts. A consequence of this model is that student-costs are always hewed to the actual value of the instruction they are receiving. Thanks to the resulting high-quality of instruction, DMO need not deny service to anyone, since its reputation is based on how much it improves its students, not on how smart they are to begin with. Once in existence, DMO will be the very embodiment of optimal knowledge-management. The instructors will have no choice but to charge exactly what their services are worth; and because the instructors pay the management, and not the other way around, the management will be forced to hire and retain the best instructors, and they will also have every reason not to bloat up their own ranks with redundant personnel, since the money for such a person would come out of their own end. Conclusion of the Present Work Other things being equal, some universities would like to have higher retention rates than they currently have. But other things are not equal. If universities made the kinds of systemic changes to themselves needed to guarantee higher retention rates, they would alienate most of their current customers. Also, universities don’t need higher retention rates. There are many universities with retention-rates that are well under 50% (and graduation-rates that are in the single digits), and not a single one of them is even close to closing its doors. The only brick-and-mortar university that has even come close to shutting down in the last twenty years is Sweet Briar, a private women’s college, and it had (and continues to have) a a 71% retention rate. (The national average is just over 50%.) Finally, even if universities do need them, they are doing much, apart from some marketing, to increase them. They are not changing their prices, their services or their business-model; and they are certainly not asking outside experts to come in and house-clean. It has been suggested that universities might improve their retention-rates through judicious use of knowledge-management. Though prima facie reasonable, this suggestion is quite misconceived. The reason is that universities depend for their very existences on poor knowledge management. Some organizations survive by being efficient: they make their money by providing people with well-defined results. Such organizations need good knowledge management. Microsoft is in this category, along with Nike, Walmart, and Hyundai. Other organizations survive by being inefficient: they make their money by providing services that don’t have definite results and by making those services as expensive as possible. Organizations that provide marketing, therapy, coaching and other similarly nebulous services tend to fall into this category. Most marketing firms would go out of business immediately if they were only paid for results, and it is therefore a marketing firm’s financial interest to keep the ratio of services to results as high as it can without entirely losing credibility. Such an organization wants to be able to justify high billings without producing corresponding results, and it does this by hiring useless ‘experts’, conducting various studies, having useless meetings, and the like. Consequently, many people within such an organization have strong incentives not to communicate efficiently, since efficient communications would tend to expose them a useless. It also means that it isn’t clear what is worth communicating, since the company’s objectives are vague and internally incoherent. Universities fall into this category. They do provide some legitimate services, but these only account for a fraction of their revenue, the rest coming from overpriced ancillary services. For this reason, universities do not have a well-defined bottom-line. In certain respects, they may want to improve instruction, but that is hardly their endgame. They need to provide enough instruction to maintain their prestige. But they don’t want instruction to be too good, since that will alienate most of their customers. So they need some legitimate personnel and some illegitimate ones, and they need to provide some legitimate services and some illegitimate ones. Their objectives are therefore vague and incoherent, and it is correspondingly unclear what kind of information university-employees should make one another aware of. Universities don’t want to be better, and they are right not to want to be better, since their business would dry up if they were better. This does not mean that all is lost. It just means that the way to provide the public with better instruction is not to make universities better. The right way to provide the public with better instruction is to create a new kind of educational service that is results-based and whose revenue is hewed to its pedagogical efficacy. In this work, we have seen in detail exactly how to do this. 1 Be it noted that there is an entire industry dedicated to swindling people who don’t have college degrees by taking their money in exchange for the temporary illusion that they can have a white-collar profession. Primerica, Mary Kay Cosmetics, Herbalife, Equinox, Amway, Vector: These are all multi-level marketing schemes. Each has the same structure. People are recruited to be ‘sales representatives.’ No college degree is needed (or had, in most cases). The ‘sales representative’ pays for leads and products and training, all because he has been told that he will make this money back. He finds that it is virtually impossible to make a single sale; and he would have to make many sales to recover his losses. The only way he can make money is by recruiting more sales representatives, to whom he sells the same bill of goods that his own recruiter sold to him. And even if he is an extremely successful recruiter, he is still extremely unlikely to make more than a pittance or even just to break even. Why do these people do it? Up to a point it is because they are gullible. But ultimately it is because they want the prestige of a white-collar career. They want to be ‘executives.’ And each of these companies refers to its recruits as ‘executives.’ At Primerica, the moment you become licensed, you are a ‘team leader’ and an ‘executive’, and you are allowed to claim that you have your own office. (You time-share an office with around thirty other ‘executives.’) 2 This subject to the obvious counterexamples and qualifications, e.g. ‘Dog’ the Bounty Hunter is financially successful despite not having a college degree. But such counterexamples and qualifications are just that. And when scrutinized, they tend to confirm the proposition in question. Before having his own T.V. show, ‘Dog’ spent 18 months in prison in Texas for drug dealing, which he wouldn’t have had to have done had he had a college degree. And most people who go to prison don’t turn their experiences into T.V. shows. In fact, the basis of that show’s success lay in the fact that he was seen as an ‘everyman’ who made good, despite the odds. 3 https://www.cbsnews.com/news/25-universities-with-the-worst-graduation-rates/ 4 A high-prestige university, such as UCLA or Harvard, may make some money selling adult-learning classes and the like, but the revenue from such services is less than one tenth of one percent of the revenue from students who are enrolled in degree programs. 5 Also, universities provide far less instruction than people assume. Capable students tend to teach themselves. Students at Harvard and M.I.T. tend to be auto-didacts. The professor may do a bit of explaining, but he is more in the nature of an enforcer: he is there to make sure that students do the assignments, and students who are not able to figure out on their own how to do the assignments, mainly on the basis of a textbook and only to a minimal extent on the basis of lectures, will not last. So a university could always provide terrible instruction in every discipline, so long as the students there were sufficiently able to teach themselves the materials. And this not just a hypothetical possibility: it is a fairly good approximation to how colleges actually function. Students who do good work tend to be independently motivated and teach themselves. The courses help them learn, but not by teaching so much as by forcing them to do problem-sets, write essays, and the like. Professors are there not so much to instruct as to police. 6 That is why the fact that universities sometimes want to raise their retention rates doesn’t represent much of an opportunity for business consultants. If an OMC wants to right-size itself, it is more than willing to let people go: in fact, it will often hire consultants precisely to tell who to let go of. But universities don’t want to right-size themselves by downsizing. They don’t even particularly want to right-size themselves, for the reasons already given. And although they may sometimes want higher retention rates, the changes they are willing to make themselves to have them are extremely marginal, and university officials will be deeply uneasy about the idea of someone from the private sector telling them where to let the axe fall, as it were. 7 We often hear about law school graduates can’t find work and are stuck with hundreds of thousands of dollars in student debt, and we often hear about how lawyer-jobs are becoming more scarce, not just relative to the number of applicants, but in absolute terms, owing in part to the automation of some legal services. His this slowed the rate of applications to law school? Not one bit. Application-rates are climbing. Is this because these applicants are ignorant or lazy or defective in some way? Not necessarily. First of all, when recent law school graduates complain about their lot, they are often comparing themselves to law school graduates who got six-figure jobs right out of law school. A law school graduate today may be more likely than in times past to have to wait before getting a job. But if a law-school graduate lands what would be considered a low-end lawyer-job—if he lands a position as low-level counselor in an obscure government-agency or as in-house counsel at small college or regional bank---he will make far more money and have far more job-security than the vast majority of the population. And most people who go to law school do get jobs as lawyers, and those jobs are extremely lucrative and secure compared to most jobs. The lawyers who have those jobs may self-identify as failures; they may wish that they were star-lawyers at white-shoe law-firms making $500,000/year, instead of being undistinguished lawyers making $90,000/year. But in absolute terms they are doing well. There are law school graduates who simply fail to find jobs as lawyers. But according to the American Bar Association, approximately 87.5% end up having stable employment as lawyers, and the mean salary is $90,000. (http://www.abajournal.com/news/article/thanks_to_shrinking_class_size_a_greater_percentage_of_new_law_grads_find_e) So yes—some law-school graduates never work as lawyers, but most do; and they are prospering. Are these lawyers useful? No. Not in general. In fact, they tend to be negatively useful. They make money because, owing to their position, they can obstruct commerce, and people have to pay them in order to allow their trade. --------------- ------------------------------------------------------------ --------------- ------------------------------------------------------------ 