Uniquely Individuating Descriptions
 
     Let me start by stating the picture I wish to call into question 
     Many a person can refer to Socrates – can use the word “Socrates” or some synonym with meaning and understanding – but not be able to produce a description that applies to him and not also to many others. One can use the word “Socrates” with understanding and not know the truth of any proposition of the form: somebody uniquely has phi and “Socrates” refers to x. When asked who “Socrates” refers to, they may say “he was a great philosopher of ancient times” or “he wrote the Nichomachean Ethics”; and that may exhaust what they have to say by way of an answer to your question. What they “know” may be excessively general (“he was a great philosopher of ancient times”) or it may simply be false (“he wrote the Nichomachean Ethics”). In both cases, they will lack knowledge of any truth claim of the form: somebody uniquely has phi and “Socrates” refers to phi. They will lack knowledge of the right kind of uniquely individuating description. 
     But such people may still be able to produce sentences of the form “…Socrates…”, and really mean them. So apparently one can refer to Socrates, and think about him, without knowing of any description that singles him out. 
      The purpose of this essay is to argue for two parallel points. First, in order to refer to an object, one does have to know of some description that singles it out: one has to have knowledge of the right kind of uniquely individuating description. Second, in order to think about an object, one does have to know of some description that singles it out. Without knowledge of a uniquely individuating description, there is no reference and there is no conception. In many cases, the ability to refer to, or think about, an object does involve one’s being causally connected to the object. But the causal connection, though essential, nonetheless has a subordinate role: it facilitates conception and reference by way of being an indispensable part of one’s knowledge of a uniquely individuating description. 
     I have no doubt that Kripke’s major point about proper names is quite correct. “Socrates” is not a disguised definite description. Further, I concede that part of what makes tokens of “Socrates” refer to Socrates is (or, more accurately, can be) that those tokens stand in a certain causal relation to Socrates himself. Finally, I concede that part of what enables one to think about Socrates is (or, more accurately, can be) that one stands in a certain causal relation to the man. But I will argue that these causal relations are always embedded in knowledge of a description that applies to Socrates and Socrates alone – are embedded in knowledge of a uniquely identifying description.  
     None of Kripke’s important semantic insights require an abandonment of the position that, if one is to think about x, one must know of some description or concept that applies uniquely to x. Indeed, when we delineate what Kripke says, we will find that, on the contrary, Kripke’s story requires that one always have such knowledge. 
     I should make it clear what I will and will not be attacking. I believe that direct reference theory is correct – that the sole semantic value of “Socrates” is Socrates. But semantics is not epistemology. Given only that “Socrates” is a label, and not a description, it does not follow that I can think about Socrates without knowing a description that singles him out. And, I will argue, thinking about Socrates does require knowledge of such a description. Indeed, being able to refer to Socrates requires knowledge of such a description – notwithstanding that “Socrates” itself has no descriptive content at all. 
    A consequence of these findings is that a popular and seemingly plausible analysis of conception is quite false. In fact, much contemporary philosophy of mind and epistemology is a projection of views that seem to have support in Naming and Necessity, but in fact have none. 
       Let us start with a very quick summary of some of the relevant points in Naming and Necessity. According to Russell, “Socrates” is synonymous with a definite description; this might be “the great philosopher of antiquity who died of hemlock poisoning”. To understand the word “Socrates”, and thus to understand sentences of the form “…Socrates…”, one must obviously know the semantics of “Socrates”. So one must know that “Socrates” is synonymous with that definite description. Consequently, anyone who uses the word “Socrates” with understanding is able to produce a description that applies to Socrates and Socrates alone. In general, if one knows the semantics of a referring term, then one knows some description that applies uniquely to the referent of that term. If I can use the word “Gilgamesh” with understanding, that means I know of some description that singles out that individual. If I can produce no such description, then I cannot really know what is meant by sentences like “Gilgamesh was wise”. 
     Supposedly, Kripke demolished this view. Consider any description of Socrates that applies to him uniquely, i.e. any description that truly singles him out. Here is an example: “the greatest philosopher to have died of hemlock-poisoning”. One can understand sentences of the form “…Socrates…” without knowing that the referent of “Socrates” consumed hemlock. One can understand “Socrates was wise” without knowing that “Socrates” picks out somebody who uniquely satisfies the description: greatest philosopher to have died of hemlock-poisoning. This point holds mutatis mutandis for any description that singles out Socrates. Consider the description “the person who figures as the protagonist in most of the platonic dialogues”. One can understand the sentence “Socrates was wise” without having the slightest idea that he was a protagonist in any philosophical dialogues. Given any description D that applies uniquely to Socrates, one can understand “…Socrates…” without knowing that D applies to the referent of “Socrates”. 
      This point has many apparent consequences. Some of these are semantic in nature. Others are epistemological. 
   Here is one of the semantic consequences. “Socrates” is not synonymous with any definite description. Given any description D, one can know that “Socrates was wise” is true without knowing that somebody uniquely instantiated D and that any such person was wise. So it isn’t tenable to maintain that “Socrates” is synonymous with “the greatest philosopher to have died of hemlock-poisoning” or with any other definite description. 
     Here is one of the epistemological consequences. One can think about Socrates without knowing of any description that singles him out – without knowing a UID. 
     There are other apparent consequences, both for semantics and epistemology. Let us start with a question: Why does “Socrates” refer to Socrates and not, say, Plato? Russell’s answer was this: “Socrates” is synonymous with a description that is true of Socrates, and Socrates alone. Kripke demolished this answer. So how does Kripke answer our question? His answer is basically this: “Socrates” refers to Socrates because a certain kind of causal relation holds between tokens of “Socrates” and Socrates himself (or, more exactly, states of affairs involving Socrates). 
    Kripke has more to say on this matter. Somebody – say Smith -- saw Socrates. So Socrates’ presence caused Smith to have certain visual experiences. Smith then gave a name to Socrates. Smith was able to pass that name along to people who did not themselves see, or otherwise sense-perceive, Socrates. Of course, for Smith to pass along that name to someone, that person had to be causally connected to Smith. The process just described is repeated over and over. I myself am the 521st installment in a sequence of events like the one described. Inevitably, Smith’s original term for Socrates has undergone phonetic distortion. What I have been left with is the sound-type “Socrates”. When I produce instances of that sound-type, my words refer back to Socrates precisely because I am connected to Socrates by way of a chain like the one just described. When I say “Socrates”, my words refer to Socrates because they are causally connected to him in a certain way. In general, if an expression E refers to an object O, that is because tokens of E stand in a certain causal relation to states of affairs involving O. 
    How do you learn what a given word refers to? Ultimately, there are two ways: by description and by ostension. 
     You are young; so you have never heard the name “Socrates”. Somebody says to you: 

(*) “ ‘Socrates’ is the name of the most famous philosopher to die of hemlock poisoning.” 


Here the word “Socrates” has been defined for you in a descriptive manner. In effect, you were told that somebody O uniquely satisfies a certain description -- most famous philosopher to die of hemlock poisoning   – and that “Socrates” refers to, or names, O. 
    On the face of it, there seems to be a second, entirely distinct way of learning what a term refers to: you can be given an ostensive definition. 
   You are in a crowded market place. You see a man haranguing a crowd. Your companion says: 

(**) “that person over there [pointing to the orator] is named ‘Socrates’”. 

   
    My own view is that ostensive definition actually collapses into a kind of descriptive definition. I will argue for this later on. But, of course, this is not a point that can be taken for granted. Right now, we need only register the fact that one can learn what a term refers to through descriptive and also through ostensive definition. 
      When you give a descriptive definition of a referring term, the descriptive information must be taken to have wide-scope. Otherwise the definition turns out false.  
     (*) defines “Socrates” by means of a description: most famous philosopher of antiquity to die of hemlock poisoning. But the descriptive information in (*) is used to fix the referent of “Socrates”; that descriptive information is not itself part of the meaning of “Socrates”. 
   The following statement is true: 

(s1) “Somebody O was a unique most famous philosopher of antiquity to die of hemlock poisoning and, for any predicate *…x…*,  *…Socrates…* means:…O… 

The following statement is false: 


(s2) “…Socrates…” means: Somebody O was a unique most famous philosopher of antiquity to die of hemlock poisoning and…O…
  
   
“Socrates smoked” does not mean: somebody O was a unique most famous philosopher of antiquity to die of hemlock poisoning and O smoked.
   But there is some object O such that “Socrates smoked” means: O smoked.  
   The descriptive information in (*), and in (s1), is given wide-scope with respect to the “means that” operator. That is why such statements are true. Let us now move on. 
     It seems that, in a certain class of cases, one is able to acquire the ability to use a referring term without ever having been given either an ostensive or descriptive definition of it. Suppose you and two other people (Smith and Jones) are talking. All of a sudden Smith and Jones start talking about somebody named “Argo”. They never say who “Argo” refers to. They never say: “Argo was the president of our fraternity back in college” or “Argo was my divorce lawyer; and by sheer coincidence he’s Smith’s racquetball partner.” They do not ostensively define “Argo”; for he is not present.  Smith and Jones simply prattle on about “Argo”; and you are too polite to ask them who that person is. 
     Nonetheless, as Gareth Evans pointed out, it seems that you can still use the word “Argo” in a meaningful way. You can say “it sure sounds like Argo is an awful person”; and you can ask questions like “did Argo mean to do that to you, or was it just an accident?” 
    Prima face it seems that you can acquire the ability to use “Argo” in a meaningful way without ever having been given an ostensive or descriptive definition of it. When you say “it sounds as though Argo is an evil person”, you are using the expression “Argo” with understanding; you are not in the same category as a parrot that mindlessly says “Argo was a cad”. 
   Of course, one could say this: 

    Because you haven’t been given any kind of definition of “Argo”, you cannot really use that term with understanding, and you cannot really know what is meant by sentences containing it. When you produce the sounds “Argo sounds like a bad person”, you are really making some kind of metalinguistic statement, some statement like: “ ‘Argo’ refers to somebody who is bad”. And when you hear sentences like “Argo was a cad”, you cannot really understand; what you understand is some related meta-linguistic claim like: “‘Argo’ refers to somebody who was a cad”.

    This position cannot be summarily dismissed; and I will not dismiss it. But, for our purposes, it is enough to note that the objector’s point seems quite false. Cases like the one just described are pervasive. There are many cases where no ostensive or descriptive definition is involved in our appropriation of a proper name. We hear the term being used; and – presto! – can use it ourselves. If the objector’s point is correct, we are not really using any of these terms: we are merely mentioning them; when we produce sentences containing them, we are talking not about people, but about symbols denoting people. But this seems false. I have never been given a descriptive or ostensive definition of the term “Charlemagne”. But surely I can make statements about Charlemagne, and not just about “Charlemagne”. 
      Let us take stock. There seem to be three ways that a proper name N can be inducted into one’s lexicon. 

(i) One can be given an ostensive definition of N; 
(ii) one can be given a descriptive definition of N; or 
(iii) one can just “pick up” the use of N.

       Let us consider each category. Suppose that somebody ostensively defines “Socrates” for me. I see somebody haranguing a mob. My companion says: “that person is named ‘Socrates’”. 
      Under this circumstance, I know that there is some individual x such that x uniquely has certain properties (he is uniquely a person that I am seeing on this particular occasion behaving in a certain way, dressed in certain clothes, and so on), and I know that “Socrates” refers to x. 
    Ostensive definitions work by way of knowledge of uniquely individuating descriptions. Somebody points to some person (or object) O and says: “that guy is named ‘Fred’”. For the definition to work – for you to learn what “Fred” refers to – you must have some way of singling out the person ostended. Suppose your companion points in a certain direction and says “that is Fred”, but there are thirty different equally salient objects. In that case, the definition won’t work. You must be able to pick out the right object. 
    Picking out a single object involves knowing a uniquely individuating description. An extreme case will bring out my meaning. Suppose that there are thirty numerically different, but qualitatively different men in a certain place. Your companion Bob goes up to one of them, put his hand on his shoulder, and says “this guy is named ‘Fred’”. Even though the person just named is qualitatively just like many others, you now of some description that applies to him and to no one else. You know that: There is some individual x such that x is uniquely a person whom Bob just picked out – such that x uniquely has the property that Bob just put his hand on his shoulder – and “Fred” names x. 
    Now imagine a slightly different scenario. You and Bob are in the presence of thirty qualitatively identical individuals. (They are in different places of course.)  Bob doesn’t actually put his hand on anyone’s shoulder. But there is some person x such that Bob is able to use an act of pointing to distinguish x from the other people (and objects) in his vicinity and such that Bob tells you that “Fred” refers to x. 
    Bob’s definition works. It works only because you know of some existence claim that Fred, and Fred alone, satisfies. You know that: there is some specific person x such that x uniquely is such that Bob just pointed him out. You also know that “Fred” refers to that person. But your being able to know “Fred” refers to that specific person involves your knowing the truth of some claim of the form: somebody x uniquely has phi and “Fred” refers to phi. You know what “Fred” refers to only because you know of some description that singles out Fred: some “uniquely individuating description”. 
   The description is not one that tells you much about what kind of person Fred is. In fact, that description doesn’t tell you anything about how Fred is psychologically or (leaving aside facts about spatio-temporal location) physically different from other people. The description in question gives you enough information to cognitively single out Fred, and it gives you very little, if anything, beyond that. But that is neither here nor there. In this context, there is only one important point. Your knowing what “Fred” depends essentially on your knowing the truth of some proposition of the form: somebody x uniquely has phi and “Fred” names x.     
      This is not to deny that your knowing what “Fred” refers to involves your having some kind of causal connection to Fred.  You do have some kind of causal connection to Fred; you see him; and this involves your being causally connected to him. You acquire the ability to use the word “Fred” in consequence of (possibly among other things) this causal connection.  So your subsequent uses of “Fred” refer to Fred in virtue of, possibly among other things, this causal connection. 
     But the causal connection is not the primary thing; the causal connection is a component of something more important. It is a component of your knowledge of a uniquely individuating description. How is the meaning of “Fred” given to you? It is given to you ostensively. But, even so, it is, at least in effect, given to you through an existence claim. You know the truth of some claim of the form: there is some x such that x uniquely has phi and “Fred” refers to x. Now, your knowing the truth of that claim involves your being causally connected to Fred. For the claim in question involved visual perception (or, at any rate, some kind of sense-perception); and seeing (or otherwise sense-perceiving) a thing involves being causally connected to it. But how is vision (sense-perception) involved? It is involved in exactly this sense: it enables you to know the truth of some existence claim of the kind described a moment ago; sense-perception is involved in the sense it apprises you of the truth of a uniquely individuating description. A causal connection to Fred is involved in your knowing what “Fred” refers to: but this causal connection is involved only to the extent that is constitutive of your knowing the right kind of uniquely individuating description. 
    What we’ve established so far is this. In some cases, not all, we learn what a term refers to through ostension definition. When we acquire the ability to use a term through ostensive definition, our ability to use that term with understanding consists in our having knowledge of some uniquely individuating description of the referent: it involves our knowing the truth of some claim of the form something x uniquely has phi and N refers to x, where N is the word in question. 
      As we saw, there seem to be three ways that a proper name N can be inducted into one’s lexicon. 

(i) One can be given an ostensive definition; 
(ii) one can be given a descriptive definition of N; or 
(iii) one can just “pick up” the use of N.

  
  We’ve already dealt with (i). Let us now deal with (iii). We will soon see why we are skipping to (iii), and not dealing right away with (ii).
    Once again, consider the case where you are talking with Smith and Jones. They suddenly starting talking about somebody named “Argo”. They are acquainted with Argo, but you are not. At no point in the conversation do they ever  say anything like “Argo was my divorce lawyer” or “Argo was the best man at my wedding”. They never give you a uniquely individuating description; they never give you a definite description that applies to Argo.
     Of course, given that they are producing sentences of the form “…Argo…”, it follows that you are, in effect, given many indefinite descriptions that apply to him. Smith says “Argo is a real cad.” So here you are being given an existence claim of the form: somebody x is a cad and “Argo” refers to x. But, of course, many people are cads; so given only that you know the truth of this existence claim, it doesn’t follow that you know which specific person – which specific cad – “Argo” refers to. 
       The truth is: merely by virtue of the fact that you overheard Smith and Jones using the word “Argo”, you have been given a definite description that applies to Argo, and you have learned some true proposition of the form: some thing or some person x uniquely has phi and “Argo” refers to x. 
     Unlike you, Smith is personally acquainted with Argo. Thus, for reasons we’ve covered, Smith knows some true proposition of the form: some thing (or some person) x uniquely has phi and “Argo” refers to x. 
     In the course of your conversation with Smith and Jones, you often hear Smith make statements like “Argo was a cad”, and “maybe Argo wasn’t so bad”. On each such occasion, there was one person to whom Smith was referring by means of the word “Argo”. Suppose that, on occasion t, Smith says “Argo was a cad”. Obviously the description “x is a cad” is indefinite, and applies to many. But on that occasion, there was exactly one person who Smith was describing as being a cad; and you know this, merely by virtue of overhearing Smith’s statement. So, just by virtue of being colloquy with Smith, you do pick up knowledge of some claim like: on occasion t, there was exactly one person who Smith described as being a cad, and “Argo” refers to x. 
      To test the mettle of my thesis, let us make things as difficult as possible for it. Suppose that Smith goes on a rant. He says “Flipper is a cad; Argo is a cad; Ichabod is a cad; Peewee is a cad…” You have never heard any of these names before; you have not even heard Smith (or Jones) use any of those names in the context of the conversation in which you are currently engaged. Let us further suppose that you never hear anyone use any of these names again; so on no later occasion are you given any further information about them or their referents. Nonetheless, merely by virtue of overhearing these words on that one occasion, you can appropriate them into your lexicon, and use them meaningfully: you can make statements, and ask question, about Argo and Flipper and Peewee; for example, you can say “Peewee and Argo probably didn’t have very nurturing parents”. 
   This fact seems to confute the theory I just put forth. You hear Smith use the name “Argo” just once; and what Smith is saying about “Argo” is identical with what he is saying about “Peewee” and “Flipper” and all the rest. So, under these circumstances, you do not know some true existence claim of the form: on such and such occasion, there was exactly one person whom Smith was describing as a cad, and “Argo” refers to x. For that claim isn’t true; on the occasion in question, Smith was describing several people as cads. 
    Despite all of this, I submit, you still know of some true existence claim of the form. In fact, you know several such existence claims. First of all, we must take care not to define the term “occasion” too broadly. The term “occasion” can refer to a three week period or a three nanosecond period. Suppose you go to three-day long party and you meet many people. You can truly say “I met two hundred people on that occasion”. But within that occasion, there were other occasions. Perhaps you went to the veranda and met some people there. On that occasion you met forty people. And within that occasion, there were yet others. There was the time that so and so spilled his drink: referring to that incident, you could truly say “on that occasion I seriously regretted leaving my house that day.” 
   Terms like “occasion” and “context” are (pun intended) context-sensitive. An occasion (or context) could comprise nothing more than a two millisecond, three cubic millimeter of space-time. But an occasion could conceivably comprise an entire galactic era. 
    Given this, let us reconsider your discussion with Smith and Jones. The statement “on that occasion, there was no one person whom Smith described as a cad” is true, if by “that occasion” you mean the whole discussion. But there were many occasions within the discussion. There was the time Jones spilled his beer; the time Smith made an unseemly pass at the waitress; the awkward moment when you realized that you hadn’t brought any money with you; the time Smith used the name “Yaroblinsky”. Within that discussion Smith described many people as cads. But given any one of those people, there was indeed some occasion, within the discussion in question, such that, on that specific occasion, Smith described that person, and only that person, as a “cad”. Let x be any one of the unfortunates who, in that conversation, Smith described as a cad. Within that conversation, there was some occasion such that, on that occasion, Smith described x, and x alone, as a cad. Of course, Smith’s referring to x as a cad involved Smith’s using some name: “Argo” or “Peewee” or “Ichabod” or “Beezer”. Smith had to say “Argo is a cad” or “Beezer is a cad”. He couldn’t just say “__ is a cad” or “x is a cad”. Let N be any one of the names Smith used, in the discussion in question, to ascribe to somebody the property of being a cad; and, as before, let x be any of the people to whom Smith ascribed that property.  Within the conversation in question,  there was some occasion such that, on that occasion, Smith described x, and x alone, as a cad and such that Smith used N to refer to Smith. Thus, within the conversation in question,  there was some occasion such that, on that occasion, Smith described some person x, and x alone, as a cad and such that Smith used “Argo” to refer to x. Within that same conversation, there was some other occasion such that, on that occasion, Smith described some person x, and x alone, as a cad and such that Smith used “Peewee” to refer to x. Exactly the same thing (mutatis mutandis) is true of “Ichabod” and “Beezer”, and each of the other aforementioned names.
     Let us focus on “Argo”. You are a part of the conversation in question; in any case, you overhear it. Within that conversation, there was some specific occasion on which Smith described some single person x as a cad; moreover, Smith referred to x as “Argo”. Here, of course, the term “occasion” is covering a small window of time. But, uncontroversially, within that narrow window, there was some one person whom Smith described as a cad, and to whom Smith referred as “Argo”. Since you are part of the conversation, you know this. When you hear Smith say “Argo is a cad”, you know that Smith is referring to a single person; and you can distinguish the occasion – the narrow window of time – in which Smith produced that sentence from the narrow window of time in which Smith said “Peewee is a cad”. And you can distinguish both occasions from the narrow window of time in which Smith aid “Beezer is a cad”. You can cognitively keep all of these occasions separate. Given any one of these occasions, you know that Smith was describing exactly one person x as a cad; and you also know which name Smith used to make that statement. So there is some specific occasion O such that, on O, Smith describing a single person x as a cad, and Smith used “Argo” to refer to x. And you know this: you know it merely by virtue of being a part of the colloquy in question. So merely by virtue of being a part of that discussion – nay, merely by virtue of over-hearing it – you know the truth of some claim of the form: 

(*) on such and such occasion, somebody x was uniquely such that Smith described x as a cad, and Smith used “Argo” to refer  to x.  

There is only a trivial difference between (*) and: 

(**) on such and such occasion, somebody x was uniquely such that Smith described x as a cad, and “Argo” refers  to x.  

   

    So merely by virtue of being in a position to “pick up” use of the term “Argo”, you are ipso facto in a position to know the truth of (**). Thus merely by virtue of being in a position to “pick up” use of the term “Argo some existence claim of the form: there is some x such that x uniquely has phi and “Argo” refers to x. 
    It is plain that what enables you to pick up the term “Argo” is you knowledge of some claim of the sort just described. Your picking up a term like “Argo” -- i.e. your appropriating it in manner (iii), as opposed to manner (ii) or (i) – involves your witnessing a sentence of the form “…Argo…” It involves your encountering a case of somebody’s ascribing a property to Argo. (This is true even if you read such sentence: you are still, in effect, encountering somebody’s using that sentence to make such a statement.) Whenever you witness a token of “Argo has phi” you are witnessing an occasion such that, on that occasion, there is somebody x such that, on that occasion, the property of being a phi is being ascribed to x and x alone; and you are also witness that, on said occasion, “Argo” is being used to refer to x. So if you “pick up” use of the word “Argo”, that involves the following: there is some specific occasion O such that you know that, on that occasion, exactly one person x is being described as having phi and “Argo” refers to x. 
    We must be careful to distinguish the following claims: 

(a) Exactly one person has phi. 
(b) Exactly one person is being described, on some particular occasion, as having phi. 

   There are many cads. But there are many occasions where only one person is being described as a cad 
    Your picking up the word “Argo” doesn’t involve your learning the truth some claim like: exactly one person x is a cad, and “Argo” refers to x. Such a claim is false; there are many cads. Your picking up “Argo” involves your learning the truth of some claim: on some specific occasion, exactly one person x is being described as a cad, and “Argo” refers to x.
    We must take care to make one other distinction. Smith himself never uttered an existence claim of the form:  there is some x such that x uniquely has phi and “Argo” refers to x.  Smith himself never uttered an existence claim of the form:   on occasion t, I (Smith) referred to somebody x as a cad and “Argo” refers  to x. Smith said only “Argo is a cad”, “Peewee is a cad”, and so forth. But the information that you are given, by virtue of being in discussion with Smith, is not confined to what Smith himself says. When Smith says “Argo is a cad”, the information that is encoded in his words is quite threadbare. But you are given information above and beyond that information; you witness Smith’s speech act. You put that speech act within a larger context; you have an enormous amount of information about when that speech act occurs. You know that it occurred after certain other events (e.g. before Smith spilled his beer) and before certain other events (e.g. before Jones made the unseemly pass at the waitress). In any case, even though what Smith was saying might have been minimal, the information you have about Smith’s saying it  – about the context in which that speech-act occurred -- is enormous; and that information does sufficient to give you the right kind of uniquely individuating description. Smith’s words do not by themselves give you a uniquely individuating description that applies to Argo or Peewee or Ichabod. But there is something that does give you such a description: that something is your perception of the conversational context in which Smith uses the word “Argo”. 
    There is no vicious circularity in this account. Smith personally met Argo. He learned the meaning of “Argo” through an ostensive definition. Maybe Smith himself gave Argo the name “Argo”. In any case, Smith saw Argo, and then learned (or stipulated) that the thing he was seeing was named “Argo”. 
     You meet Smith. You have a conversation with him.  On some specific occasion within that conversation, Smith says “Argo was a cad”. You thus know that, on that occasion, there somebody x such that Smith is describing x, and only x, as a cad, and “Argo” is how Smith is referring to x. the uniquely individuating description you associated with “Argo” is not: “the unique person x such that x is named ‘Argo’”. Rather, it is: the unique person x such that, on such and such occasion, smith was describing x as a cad.”
    In the circumstance just described, you are only at one remove from somebody who was directly acquainted with Argo – with somebody to whom “Argo” was defined ostensively. 
    But what we’ve said applies equally to the case where you are at five hundred removes from the referent of the word in question. Consider this scenario. Smith doesn’t personally know Argo. But Smith knows Brown, and Brown personally knows Argo. Smith is not given an ostensive or descriptive definition of “Argo”. But Smith overhears Brown saying “Argo is a cad” or whatnot; and on this basis, Smith is able to add “Argo” to his own lexicon: we just described the principles governing such an addition. You then overhear Smith saying things like “Argo is a cad”, “Argo is a mean person”, or whatnot. You are not given an ostensive or descriptive definition of “Argo”. But on the basis of what you overhear, you are able to add “Argo” to your lexicon: the principles that govern Smith’s appropriation of “Argo” obviously apply to your appropriation of that name. By exactly similar reasoning, it wouldn’t matter if you were five hundred removes from somebody who was actually acquainted with Argo: the same principles would apply; and in each case, what would enable to use “Argo” to refer to Argo would be your knowledge of some claim of the form: something x uniquely has phi and “Argo” refers to x (where phi would be some property of the form: is a person who, on such and such occasion is being described as having thus and such property). 
    OF course, words undergo degradation and alteration as they change hands. The first person who uses the word “Argo” might pronounce one way; the people who “pick up” that name from that person might pronounce it differently. But this fact obviously doesn’t affect the principles governing appropriation of that word. Brown might pronounce “Argo” one way; Smith might pronounce it differently; you might pronounce it a third way; the people to whom you transmit this word might pronounce it a fourth way. After a few transmissions, what is left might bear extremely little resemblance to Brown’s pronunciation. In some contexts, that fact is of importance. But that fact has no bearing on our point: that, whenever somebody “picks up” a name – whenever they add it to their lexicon in manner (ii) – it is in virtue of their having knowledge of a uniquely individuating description that applies to the referent. It is obvious how these points apply to names like “Socrates”. The word that Socrates’ own acquaintances used to refer to him was not “Socrates”; that word probably had some phonetic similarities to “Socrates”; but there were also non-trivial differences. Nonetheless, however distorted “Socrates” may be relative to the word that the Ancient Greeks used, the principles governing the “picking up” of that word – or any one of its ancestors or descendants, no matter how much phonetic distortion is involved – are the same. In each case, whenever one adds it to their lexicon in manner (ii) – it is in virtue of their having knowledge of a uniquely individuating description that applies to the referent, namely Socrates. 
     So suppose that “Sukrat” is the Ancient Greek word for Socrates. Glaucon learns what “Sukrat” means through an ostensive definition. Glaucon is engaged in a discussion with Zenon. Glaucon never gives Zenon any ostensive or descriptive definition of “Suktrat”. But Glaucon does produce a sentence of the form “…Sukrat…” Thus, for reasons discussed, Zenon acquires the ability to use “Sukrat” to refer to Socrates; and, for reasons discussed, Zenon’s ability to this involves his knowing a uniquely individuating description that applies to Socrates. Zenon has a conversation with Phoebus. Zenon slightly mispronounces “Sukrat”. In a manner exactly analogous to that just described, Phoebus acquires the ability to use that, slightly mispronounced version of “Sukrat” to refer to Socrates. In this way, variants of “Sukrat” are transmitted from person to person, from generation to generation. What we are left with, two thousand years later, is a word that is quite different (at least phonetically) from “Socrates”. But one’s acquiring the ability to use that word, however distorted it might be relative to the original word for “Socrates”, involves one’s learning some uniquely individuating description that applies to Socrates; it involves one’s learning some true claim of the form: somebody x uniquely has phi and “Socrates” has x. But, in most cases, “phi” will be some property like is described, on such and such occasion, by so and so, as having thus and such property. “Phi” will not be a property of historical moment; it will not be a property like great philosopher of antiquity who drank hemlock or philosopher who figured as the protagonist in most of Plato’s dialogues. The property in question will be some highly contextual one, some property that doesn’t connect in any significant way with Socrates’ intellectual or historical countenance. 
     Let us take stock. There are three ways you can add a referring term to your lexicon: 

(i) you can be given an ostensive definition; or
(ii) you can be given a descriptive definition; or
(iii) you can witness use of that word, and simply “inherit” it. 

  We’ve found that whenever (i) or (iii) is the case, your ability to use the word involves your having knowledge of a uniquely individuating description of the referent of that word. Let us now consider the second of these three categories: descriptive definition. 
     Here it is very easy to fall prey to a confusion. Imagine the following. You have never heard the word “Socrates” before. You are talking with your friend Charlie; he says “Seymour is a latter day Socrates”. You don’t know who “Socrates” refers to? So you ask: “Who is Socrates?” Charlie says: “Socrates was the author of the Nichomachean Ethics and the Posterior Analytics”. 
    Of course, Charlie is wrong; Socrates did not write either of those works; and “Socrates” does not refer to the author of either of those works. At the same time, in consequence of your having this exchange with Charlie, you can use the word “Socrates” to refer to Socrates. 
    Here it seems as though you are able to refer to use the word “Socrates” to refer to Socrates, even though your only belief about him is wrong – even though the only thing you “know” about him isn’t true. But this appearance is misleading. What we have here is a case where you add a word to your lexicon in manner (iii). You do know some uniquely individuating description that applies to Socrates. But that description is not “the unique author of the Nichomachean Ethics and the Posterior Analytics”. Rather, it is: *the person to whom Charlie, on occasion t, ascribed the property of writing the Nichomachean Ethics and the Posterior Analytics*1, for some value of t. 
     In most cases where we seem to be appropriating a name in manner (ii), we are in fact appropriating it in manner (iii). But we can certainly construct a case where, unmistakably, we are appropriating a name in manner (iii). (Here I basically repeating a point made, in different forms, by Kripke, Kaplan, and Evans.) Suppose you and Charlie are having a conversation. Neither of you has any idea who invented the zipper. You and Charlie decide that, at least when speaking to each other, you will refer to that person, whoever it is, as “Julius”. So you have no idea who invented the zipper. But you kow that somebody did, and you have stipulated that Julius refers to that person.  Thus you have added a semantic rule to English (or, at any rate, to a certain idiolect of English). It must be made clear what that rule is. The rule is given by the following: 

(Z) Somebody x uniquely invented the zipper, and “Julius” refers to x. 

The descriptive information is given wide-scope with respect to the “refers to” operator. So if Smith was a unique zipper-inventor, then “Julius was a millionaire” means Smith was a millionaire. That sentence does not mean: somebody x uniquely invented the zipper and x was a millionaire. “Julius” is a name, not a quantifier. 
    You and Charlie don’t know who “Julius” refers to. (nether do I.) But it does refer to somebody. On the face of it, it certainly seems as though you can use it significantly: you can, with understanding, say things like “Julius was probably a talented inventor” and “Julius must be worth a fortune”. 
     Some people have said that, under the circumstances, you cannot say things like “Julius must be worth a fortune” and really mean them. This may or may not be true (I will weigh in on this shortly). But what everybody will agree on is this. If you and I can use the term “Julius” with understanding, it is only because we know some true claim of the form: somebody x uniquely has phi, and “Julius” refers to x. Here, of course, phi is the property of inventing the zipper. 
     I do not wish to be misunderstood. A strong case can be made that unless you know who invented the zipper, you don’t know which proposition is semantically encoded in “Julius must be worth a fortune”, and other such sentences.   What you know, it could be argued, is some like: for some object O, the sentence “Julius must be worth a fortune” is true exactly if O must be worth a fortune. Since you don’t know which object invented the zipper, you don’t know who “Julius” refers to; and you therefore don’t know which proposition is encoded in that sentence. But, at the same time, you have a kind of metalinguistic knowledge about “Julius must be worth a fortune” which, in some respects, simulates real understanding of it. 
     Be all of this as it may, what is clear is that if, under the circumstances described, you or Charlie understand “Julius must be worth a fortune” – if, under those circumstances, you understand “Julius” – it is entirely because you know the truth of some claim of the form: somebody x uniquely has phi [the property of inventing the zipper], and “Julius” refers to x. 
    In everyday life, there are many cases where we seem to be adding a name to our lexicon in manner (ii). Suppose little Timmy has never heard the name “Shakespeare” before. You say to him: “Shakespeare is the person who wrote Romeo and Juliet”. Here it seems that the three year old is appropriating the name “Shakespeare” in manner (ii); for what you are telling him is, in effect: there is some x such that x uniquely wrote Romeo and Juliet and “Shakespeare” refers to x. 
   But really little Timmy has appropriated “Shakespeare” in manner (iii). A Kripke-style argument shows this. After your conversation with him, little Timmy can make statements about Shakespeare; they may be wrong and ill-informed; but they are wrong and ill-informed statements about Shakespeare. Let us suppose he does so; he asks “did Shakespeare like French fries?”, and says “Shakespeare must have been weird, because his writing is so funny”. 
    But what if it turns out Shakespeare did not write Romeo and Juliet? What if it turns out that, although he wrote Hamlet and King Lear and Timon of Athens, he didn’t write Romeo and Juliet? Does that mean that little Timmy’s old statements were blanks? Was the three year old not referring to anybody? It seems not; it seems that little Timmy did manage to ask whether Shakespeare liked French fries. 
    But if Little Timmy’s ability to refer to Shakespeare depended on Shakespeare’s having written Romeo and Juliet – if little Timmy’s ability to refer to Shakespeare depended on the accuracy of the statement: somebody uniquely wrote Romeo and Juliet and “Shakespeare” refers to x – then his statements would indeed have been abortive. 
   What is going on here is that little Timmy added “Shakespeare” to his lexicon in manner (iii). He heard you refer to him; so the existence claim through which he added “Shakespeare” to his lexicon is something like: there is some x such that, on such and such occasion, Daddy said that x wrote Romeo and Juliet and “Shakespeare” refers to x.  And that existence-claim remains true, even though the other one -- somebody uniquely wrote Romeo and Juliet and “Shakespeare” refers to x – turns out false. 
     What role did this other existence claim – the one that turned out wrong – have? Suppose you see meet somebody at a party; you don’t know him; but he acts as though he is very important. You ask your companion “who is that guy? What gives him the right to be so self-important?” You are told: “he is the dean”. Before you know who that person was, you were able to refer to him, and also to have thought about him. You were able to think he is obnoxious and ask “what gives him the right to act in such haughty manner?” But, despite this fact, there is still some sense in which you don’t know who he is. You can be able to think about, and refer to, somebody, without knowing quite who they are. When you tell little Timmy “Shakespeare is the guy who wrote Romeo and Juliet”, you are telling him (or trying to tell him) who Shakespeare was: and this, as we’ve just seen, is different from transmitting to Timmy the ability to think about, or refer to Shakespeare. (Of course, what we’ve said about Shakespeare and “Shakespeare” applies to inanimate objects and the words that label them.) Most “descriptive definitions” are really cases where one is learning who somebody is, or which object something is; they are not cases where one is acquiring the ability to refer to, or think about, that thing. Usually, the ability to refer to, and think about, the object in question pre-exists 
   There are cases where one is genuinely acquiring a name in manner (ii); but they are not easy to produce; and they tend to be somewhat artificial. 
   But here there is only one really important point. Whenever one adds a referring term to one’s lexicon, that involves one’s knowing some uniquely individuating description of the referent: for any name N, then one’s adding N to one’s lexicon involves one’s knowing some true claim of the form: somebody x uniquely has phi, and N names x. (This is true, we found, even in the case where one acquires the name through ostensive definition.) The existence claims usually are not ones of historical moment; they are not ones like somebody x wrote Romeo and Juliet and “Shakespeare” names x. They are usually highly specific to the peculiarities of one’s own situation. But what is important is that knowledge of some such claim, historically trivial though it may be,  is needed to use a named to refer to a thing.     I wish to be clear on one point. Even though we learn what a name refers to through some existential-descriptive claim, the name itself is just a label. Semantically, “Shakespeare” simply labels Shakespeare; it doesn’t have any descriptive content (except such as it has in virtue of being a mere label of Shakespeare). But one always learns which thing a name labels through some existential-descriptive claim. The semantics are not existential-descriptive; but the act of learning the semantics is existential-descriptive.  The semantic rule for “Shakespeare” must be given to you in some way or other. But what  is given is not the same thing as how it is given. The following statement is false: 

(S1) The semantic rule for “Shakespeare” is this: somebody x uniquely wrote Hamlet and “Shakespeare” names x. 

  S1 is false because “Shakespeare” refers to Shakespeare in worlds where Hamlet was never written. So the semantics for “Shakespeare” cannot have anything to do with Hamlet. 
  But the following statement is true: 

(S2) Somebody x uniquely wrote Hamlet and, and the semantic rule for “Shakespeare” is this:  “Shakespeare” names x. 

   The operator “the semantic rule for__ is” must be given narrow-scope. Otherwise we end up committed to a false descriptivism. The name is just a label. The literal meaning of “Shakespeare was prolific” is simply: Shakespeare wrote Hamlet. It is not: somebody x uniquely wrote Hamlet and x was prolific. 
    Though false, S1 is not, so to speak, as false as the following (the asterices are to be taken as quasi-quotation marks, i.e. as being just like quotation-marks except that they don’t quote any variables that they enclose): 

(S3) The semantic rule for “Shakespeare is this: for any predicate *…x…*, *…Shakespeare…* means: somebody O uniquely wrote Hamlet and…O…

    What is literally meant by “Shakespeare was bald” is simply Shakespeare was bald; it is not: somebody x uniquely wrote Hamlet and x was bald. 
    To avoid running afoul of Kripke’s correct points, we must take care to give the relevant operators – “refers to”, “is the semantic rule for__” – narrow scope. 
    Another point is worth bringing up. One typically forgets the existence-claim through which one added a name to one’s lexicon. One typically forgets the fist time one heard “Shakespeare” or “Aristotle”; one often forgets one’s first meeting of a person. Given this, one is tempted to say: 

   “You don’t necessarily associate any uniquely individuating description with “Aristotle” or “Smith” or “Jones”. Such a description was needed to enable you to refer to those people, and to think about them. But once that ability is in place, the description drops out. At that point, there can be pure thought about the entities in question. You can just think about Aristotle and Smith; you don’t have to think about them through a uniquely individuating description. 

       This is not how it works. What happens is not, I propose, that one ceases to have knowledge of a uniquely individuating description, but rather that one replaces one such description with another one: a related, but distinct one. 
        Remember what we said earlier about “Fred”. If you add “Fred” to your lexicon in manner (i), i.e. through an ostensive definition, that involves your knowing some claim of the form: somebody x uniquely has phi and “Fred” names x. 
        Suppose you and a friend are at a party. You see somebody wearing a bowler hat, talking animatedly. At time t, your friend points to that person and say “that is Fred”. Your adding “Fred” to your lexicon involves your knowing some existence claim, something like: 

(e1) there is now somebody x whom I am sense-perceiving and attending to, and who is wearing a bowler hat, and “Fred” names x. 
  
    Let us suppose that, a minute or so after “Fred” is ostensively defined for you, you go up to him and start talking. Now you have new information about Fred; you have a new uniquely individuating description of him. There are a number of reasons for this. First of all, the mere lapse in time between your current situation – your now talking with Fred – and the initial ostensive definition by itself guarantees that you will have a new uniquely individuating description of him. At time t, (e1) was your uniquely individuating description. But now that time has passed, (e1) has been replaced. By itself, the mere passage of time replaces (e1) with: 

(e2) there is somebody x whom, a minute or two ago, I was  sense-perceiving and attending to, and who was then wearing a bowler hat, and “Fred” names x. 


  notice that (e2) “interlocks” with (e1). The thing having the property specified in (e2) is the same as the thing having the property specified in (e1). The uniquely individuating description changes. But the new one is related to the old one in such a way that something x uniquely makes both of them true. The new one “inherits” the verifier of the old one. In a moment we will say more about this process of inheritance or transmission. 
   But other things, besides the mere passage of time, will replace (e1), with a new uniquely individuating description. You are now engaged in conversation with Fred. You can see him more clearly (although from afar he looked hale and strong, you now see that he is puffy and out of shape); he is saying certain things to you (he is talking about the national debt). As a result, you generate a new uniquely individuating description of Fred. Your new one is something like: 

(e3) there is somebody x whom, a minute or two ago, I was  sense-perceiving and attending to, and who was then wearing a bowler hat; and I am not attending to x, and conversing with him, x is now talking about the national debt, and x looks puffy and unhealthy, and “Fred” names x. 

Notice that (e3) and (e2) interlock; (e2) transmits its verifier to (e3). 
  Now that you have (e3), you can drop (e2) and (e1). You can completely forget them; and that will not jeopardize your ability to think about. Suppose a moment passes; you have stopped talking with Fred. By itself, the mere passage of time replaces (e3) with a slightly different claim: 

(e4) there is some x such that, a moment ago,  x was  talking about the national debt, and x looked puffy and unhealthy, and “Fred” names x. 


  Suppose that you have completely forgotten (e1)-(e3). You still have some uniquely individuating description of Fred. And, so long as you are able to think about Fred, this will continue to be the cases. You go home at night. (e4) is now replaced with: 

(e5)  there is some x such that, several hours ago, at a party,  x was  talking about the national debt, and x looked puffy and unhealthy, and “Fred” names x. 

  This process can continue ad infinitum. One’s ability to think about, and refer to, something can only be started up by one’s acquiring knowledge of the right kind of existence claim. Typically, that specific claim is forgotten. But it is replaced by another “interlocking” existence claim – another interlocking uniquely individuating description. And that second one will, in its turn, be replaced  by a third; and that third by a fourth, and so on. 
    The point is that the ability to think about, and refer to, an external object always involves possession of a uniquely individuating description that applies to it. 
    None of this belittles the role that causal connections play in conception and reference. I am able to think about, and refer to, Fred precisely because I saw him: and seeing something involves being causally connected to it. But how is the causal connection involved? What enables me to think about Fred is my knowledge of some uniquely individuating description: there is some guy whom I am now seeing and attending to, who is wearing a bowler hat, and “Fred” names that guy. The causal connection is involved in my seeing Fred; and my seeing Fred, in its turn, is involved in my having a uniquely individuating description of him. So what is doing the work is my knowledge of a uniquely individuating description of Fred; the causal connection, though essential, has a role that is sub-ordinate and internal to that my knowledge of that description. 
    Here we need to very clear about a certain distinction: the distinction between literal meaning and cognitive content. “Fred” is just a label. The following statement is true: 

(F1) There is somebody x who I met on such and such occasion,  and who looked pale and talked about communism; and the semantic rule for “Fred” is: “Fred” names x. 

The following statement is false: 

(F2) The semantic rule for “Fred” is this: There is somebody x who I met on such and such occasion,  and who looked pale and talked about communism; and “Fred” names x. 

The following is even more false 

     
 (F3) The semantic rule for “Fred” is this: for any predicate *…x…*, *…Fred…* means: There is somebody O who I met on such and such occasion,  and who looked pale and talked about communism and…O…

  The literal meaning of 

(*) “Fred looked puffy and pale” 

is simply: 

(*LM) Fred looked puffy and pale.   

   But remember that one knows what “Fred” refers to only in so far as one knows some claim of the form: somebody x uniquely has phi and “Fred” refers to x. 

     





     
    
1 The asterices are meant to be quasi-quotes.
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------




1


